Take notes as you read a judgment using ourVirtual Legal Assistantand get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out ourPremium Memberservices --Free for one month.Supreme Court of IndiaAnglo-French Textile Co. Ltd vs Commissioner Of ... on 22 December, 1952Equivalent citations: 1953 AIR  105, 1953 SCR  454Author: M C MahajanBench: Mahajan, Mehr ChandPETITIONER:
ANGLO-FRENCH TEXTILE CO.  LTD.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
COMMISSIONER OF INCOME-TAX,MADRAS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT:
22/12/1952

BENCH:
MAHAJAN, MEHR CHAND
BENCH:
MAHAJAN, MEHR CHAND
DAS, SUDHI RANJAN
BOSE, VIVIAN
BHAGWATI, NATWARLAL H.

CITATION:
 1953 AIR  105		  1953 SCR  454
 CITATOR INFO :
 C	    1954 SC 198	 (10,10A)
 R	    1958 SC 269	 (14)
 R	    1958 SC 861	 (15)
 RF	    1965 SC1526	 (15)


ACT:Indian	Income-tax  Act(XI of 1922),ss.  42(1),42(3)-Non-
resident-Purchase  of  materials  in  India  by	 established
agency--Whether	 an  " operation "-Profits  attributable  to
purchase, whether assessable in India-"Business connection,"
meaning of.



HEADNOTE:
Though a few isolated transactions of purchase of raw  mate-
rials  in  India  by a	manufacturer  carrying	on  business
outside	 India	may not amount to the carrying on  of  an  "
operation " in India within the meaning ofs. 42(3) of	 theIndian	Income-tax  Act, where raw materials  are  purchased
systematically	 and   habitually  in	India	through	  an
established  agency having special skill and  competency  in
selecting the goods, such an activity will be an "operation"
within a. 42 (3), and the portion of the profits
455
attributable  to the purchases in India can be	assessed  to
incometax  unders. 42(1)and (3) of theIndian  Income-tax
Act.
Bangalore  Woollen, Cotton & Silk Mills Co. Ltd. v.  Commis-
sioner	of  Income-tax,	 Madras	 [1950]	 (18  I.T.R.   423),Commissioner  of Income-tax, Bombay v. Ahmedbhai Umarbhaid
Co.  ([1950] S.C.R. 335), Commissioners of Taxation v.	Kirk
([1900] A.C. 588), -Rogers Pyatt Shellac Co. v. Secretary of
Statefor India ([1925] I.L.R. 52 Cal. 1) andWebb  Sons  &
Co.  v.	 Commissioner of Incometax, East Punjab([1950]  18
I.T.R. 33) relied on.
An  isolated  transaction  between  a  non-resident  and   a
resident  in  India without any course of dealings  such  as
might fairly be described as a business connection does	 not
attract	 the  application  ofs. 42, but  when	there  is  a
continuity  of business relationship between the  person  in
India  who helps to make the profits and the person  outside
India	who   receives	or  realises   the   profits,	such
relationship constitutes a business connection.



JUDGMENT:CIVIL  APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 12 of  1952.
Appeal	from the Judgment and Order dated the 18th  January,
1950,	of   the  High	Court  of   Judicature	 at   Madras
(Satyanarayana	Rao  and  Viswanatha  Sastri  JJ.)  in	Case
Referred No. 27 of 1947.O.T.  G.  Nambiar  (S.	 N. Mukherjee,	with  him)  for	 the
appellant.M.C.   Setalvad,   Attorney-General  for   India,   and	  C.
K.Daphtary,  Solicitor-General for India (G.  N.  Joshi	 and
P.A. Mehta, with them) for the respondent.
1962.  December 22.  The Judgment of the Court was delivered
by
MAHAJAN J. -This is an appeal from the judgment of the	High
Court  of  Judicature at Madras dated  18th  January,  1950,
delivered   on	a  reference  by  the	Incometax-.Appellate
Tribunal  undersection 66(1)of the Indian Income-tax	Act,
whereby the  High Court answered the two questions  referred
in  the	 affirmative.'	The appellant is  a  public  limited
company	 incorporated  in  the United  Kingdom	and  owns  a
spinning  and weaving mill located at Pondicherry in  French
Indial.	  The  year  of	 account of  the  appellant  is	 the
calendar  year.	 In the year 1939 no sales of yarn or  cloth
manufactured by the company were effected in456British	 India, though in the previous year such sales	were
effected.   All	 the purchases of cotton  required  for	 the
mills  were  made in British India by Messrs.  Best  &	Co.,
Ltd.  Under an agreement between the appellant	and  Messrs.
Best  &	 Co., Ltd., Madras, dated 11th July,  1939,  Messrs.
Best  &	 Co.,  Ltd.  were  constituted	the  agents  of	 the
appellant  for	the  purposes  of  its	business  in  India.
Messrs.	  Best	&  Co., Ltd. have under	 the  terms  of	 the
agreement full powers in connection with the business of the
appellant  in the matter of purchasing stock, signing  bills
and other negotiable instruments and receipts and  settling,
compounding  or	 compromising any claim by  or	against	 the
appellant.   The  agents are empowered to  borrow  money  on
behalf of the appellant and to make advances.  They are also
expected   to  secure  the  best  commissions,	 brokerages,
rebates, discounts and other allowances in respect of and in
connection  with  the business of the appellant.   They	 are
enjoined to keep proper accounts of the appellant and to pay
over to the appellant the sum standing to its credit.	They
are  remunerated  by a salary of Rs. 6,500 per mouth  and  a
percentage  commission	on  the profits	 made.	 During	 the
relevant  year all the purchases of cotton required for	 the
mill at Pondicherry were made by the agents in British India
and  no purchases were made through any other  agency.	 The
agents exercised their judgment and skill and purchased such
qualities  and	quantities of cotton and at such  prices  as
they in their experience considered most advantageous in the
interests of the company.Prior to 1939-40 the appellant was assessed to income-tax in
British	 India on the profits computed on a  turnover  basis
earned	 by  the  sales	 in  British  India  of	 the   goods
manufactured  by  the  appellant.   In	the  course  of	 the
assessment  year  1939-40  the	appellant  stated  that	  it
discontinued its business in British India with effect	from
1st  April,  1939, and claimed relief  undersection  25`3)
which  was granted.  In the course of his further  enquiries
the Income-tax Officer found 'that though the appellant	 was
not457selling	 its  goods in British India and  earning  a  profit
thereby, it continued to have an active business  connection
in  British  India  having regard to the way  in  which	 the
business of purchasing goods and materials for them ills was
carried on.  There upon the Incometax officer held that such
purchases of cotton in British India constituted a  business
connection   in	  British  India  and	that   the   profits
attributable  to  the  purchases were liable  to  tax  undersections 42(1)and42(3)of the Act.  The net income of	 the
company was computed to be Rs. 2,81,176 and ten per cent. of
this sum was apportioned undersection 42(3), of the Act  as
being the profits and gains reasonably attributable to	that
part  of the business operations, which were carried out  in
British	 India.	  The appellant appealed  against  the	said
order  of the Income-tax Officer to the Appellate  Assistant
Commissioner  who  confirmed  the order	 of  the  Income-tax
Officer.  A further appeal by the appellant to the  Tribunal
was unsuccessful.At the instance of the appellant, the Tribunal stated a case
and referred the following questions for the decision of the
High Court undersection 66(1)of the Act :-
" 1. Whether in the circumstances of this case the assessee-
company had any business connection in British India  within
the  meaning ofsections 42(1)and42(3)of  the  Income-tax
Act ?2.Whether any profits could reasonably be attributed   to
the  purchase of entire cotton made in British India by	 the
secretaries  and agents of the assessee company	 within	 the
meaning ofsections 42(1)and42(3)of the Income-tax Act ?
The  High  Court  answered  both  these	 questions  in	 the
affirmative and, in our opinion, rightly.
The  learned counsel for the appellant reiterated before  us
the  arguments that he had addressed in the High  Court	 and
contended that on the facts of this case there was no  scope
for  the finding that any profits or. gains accrued  to	 the
assessee directly or458indirectly through or from any business connection in India.
It was argued that a mere purchase of raw materials or goods
in  British India does not result in the accrual or  arising
of  profits and that the profits on the sale of goods  arise
and  accrue only at the place where the sales  are  effected
and that in the present case, there being no sales  effected
in  British  India in the year of account 1939,	 no  profits
accrued	 or arose to the company in British India nor  could
ally profits be deemed to have accrued or arisen in  British
India.	 In support of his proposition, the learned  counsel
placed	reliance on a number of cases, inter alia, onBoard
of   Revenue   v.  Madras  Export  Co.(1),Jiwan   Das	  v.
Commissioner   of   Income-tax,	  Lahore   (2),Rahim	  v.
Commissioner  of Income-tax(3),Commissioner  of  Incometax,
of  Income-tax	v. Little's Oriental Balm Ltd.(5).  Most  of
these decisions were given under the Act of 1922, before the
insertion  ofsection	42(3) in the Act  of  1922  by	 the
amending Act of 1939.As against the cases relied upon by the learned counsel	 for
the  appellant,	 several authorities have been cited  to  us
which  have proceeded on the footing that even	purchase  of
raw  materials	could be an operation in connection  with  a
business and if it was carried on in British India it  might
make  the  profits attributable to  such  operation  taxable
undersection	42of the Indian Income-tax Act.   The	caseRogers Pyatt Shellac Co. v. Secretary of Statefor  India(6)
is  one of the leading decisions on this point.	  This	case
was  decided undersection 33of the Indian Income-tax	Act,
1918, and the judgment shows that the principle followed  in
the case was similar to that which was subsequently embodied
insection 42(3) of theIncome-tax Act, 1922.	The question
referred to the High Court in that case was in these terms:-
"Is  this company which purchased shellac and mica in  India
for sale in the open market in America
(1) (1923) I.L.R. 46 Mad. 360.(2) (I929) 1. L. R. 10 Lah. 657.(3) A.I.R. 1949 Orissa 60.(4)  A.T.R. 1946 Bom. 185.(5)  [1950) 18 I.T.R. 849.(6)  (1925) I.L.R.52 Cal. 1.459liable	to  be assessed to income-tax  and  super-tax  under
eitherIncome-tax ActVII of 1918 or Act XI of 1922 and	 the
Super-tax Act, VIII of 1917."And  it was answered in the affirmative.  The same  line  of
reasoning   was	 adopted  by  the  Rangoon  High  Court	  in
Commissioner  of Income-tax- Burma v. Steel Bros.   Co.'(1).
Among  recent cases on this point which were  decided  undersection 42of the Income-tax Act, 1922, can be mentioned the
case  ofMotor Union Insurance Co. Ltd. v.  Commissioner  of
Income-tax,  Bombay(2)	and  that  ofWebb  Sons  &  Co.  v.
Commissioner  of  Income-tax, East Punjab(3).  In  the	last
case,  the  assessee company which was incorporated  in	 the
United	States	of America was carrying on  in	America	 the
business  of  manufacturing carpets.  Its only	business  in
British India was the purchase through its agent in  British
India, of wool as raw material for use in the manufacture of
carpets.   It  was held that the purchase was  an  operation
within	the meaning ofsection 42(3), and the profits	from
such purchases could be deemed to arise in British India and
it  was consequently assessable undersection 42(3) of	 theIndian	Income-tax Act.	 The questions referred to the	High
Court in this case and relevant to this enquiry were these:
"(i)  Is mere purchase of raw material an  operation  within
the meaning ofsection 42(3) of the Act?(ii)Can	 any  profit  arise  out of  mere  purchase  of	 raw
material?"While  answering these questions in the affirmative  it	 was
said:-"It is clear that the purchase of raw material by a firm  of
manufacturers  is one of the processes or  operations  which
contributes to an appreciable degree to the ultimate  profit
which is realized on the sale of manufactured articles."
There  is  thus	 no uniformity of judicial  opinion  on	 the
question that the mere act of purchase produces no profit.
(1)  (1926) I.L.R. 3 Rang. 614.(2)  A.I.R. 1945 Bom. 285.(3) [1950) 18 I.T.R. 33.460In  our judgment, the contention of the learned counsel	 for
the appellant, and on which his whole .argument is  founded,
that  it  is the act of sale alone from	 which	the  profits
accrue	or arise can no longer be sustained, and has  to  be
repelled   in  view  of	 the  decision	of  this  Court	  inCommissioner  of Income-tax, Bombay v. Ahmedbhai Umarbhai  &
Co.(1). That was a case that arose under the Excess  Profits
Tax  Act, XV of 1940.  A firm which was resident in  British
India  and  carried  on the business  of  manufacturing	 and
selling	 groundnut  oil,  and owned some  oil  mills  within
British India also owned a mill in Raichur in the  Hyderabad
State  where oil was manufactured.  The oil manufactured  in
Raichur	 was sold partly within the State of  Hyderabad	 and
partly	in  Bombay.   It was held by  this  Court  that	 the
profits of that part of the business, viz., the	 manufacture
of  oil at the mill in Raichur accrued or arose	 in  Raichur
even though the manufactured oil was sold in Bombay and	 the
price was received there, and accordingly, that part of	 the
profits derived from sales in Bombay which was	attributable
to  the	 manufacture of the oil in Raichur was	exempt	from
excess	profits	 tax under the proviso tosection 5of	 the
Act.  Reference in this case was made to the decision of the
House  of Lords in In re Commissioners of Taxation  v.	Kirk
(2),  wherein  it  was held that where income  was  in	part
derived	 from  the extraction of ore from the  soil  of	 New
South  Wales Colony, and from the conversion in	 the  latter
colony	of the crude ore into a merchantable  product,	this
income	was  assessable under the New South Wales  Land	 and
Income Tax Assessment Act of 1895,section 15,	sub-sections
3and4, nowithstanding that the finished products were sold
exclusively outside the colony.	 Lord Davey while delivering
the judgment of the Privy Council observed as follows :-
"It appears to their Lordships that there are four processes
in  the	 earning  or  production of  this  income  -(I)	 the
extraction of the ore from the soil ; (2) the
(1) [1950] S.C.R. 335.(2) [1900] A.C. 588.461conversion  of	the crude ore into a  merchantable  product,
which  is  a  manufacturing process; (3)  the  sale  of	 the
merchantable product; (4) the receipt of the moneys  arising
from  the  sale.  All these processes are  necessary  stages
which  terminate  in  'money, and the income  is  the  money
resulting  less	 the expenses attendant on all	the  stages.
The  first process seems to their Lordships  clearly  within
sub-section  3, and the second or manufacturing Process,  if
not  within  the meaning of ' trade ' in  subsection  1,  is
certainly  included in the words any others source  whatever
in sub-section 4.So  far as relates to these two processes, therefore,  their
Lordships  think that the income was earned and arising	 and
accruing in New South Wales."On  a parity of reasoning it can well be said in  this	case
that the profits accrue or arise to the appellant from three
business  processes  or	 operations,  those  being  (1)	 the
purchase  of cotton in British India; (2) its conversion  by
the process of manufacture in Pondicherry into yarn or cloth
;  and (3) the sale of the merchantable product,  and  those
have to be apportioned between these three operations.	 The
same line of reasoning was adopted by the Madras High  Court
inBangalore  Woollen,	 Cotton & Silk Mills  Co.   Ltd.  v.
Commissioner  of Income-tax, Madras(1).	 There it  was	held
that  the purchase of raw materials by the man-aging  agents
in British India would be an operation within the meaning ofsection	 42(3)and-it was reasonable to attribute a  portion
of the profits to such purchases in British India.
After  a careful consideration of the decided cases on	the
subject	 and in view of the insertion ofsection 42(3)  in
the Act of 1922 by the amending Act of 1939, we have reached
the conclusion that in the present state of the law there is
hardly	any scope for maintaining the view contended for  by
the learned counsel for the appellant and we therefore agree
with the High Court in repelling it.  While maintaining	 the
view taken by the High Court in this case we wish
(1)  [1950] 18 I.T.R. 423.462to  point  out that it is not every business activity  of  a
manufacturer that comes within the expression "operation" to
which the provisions ofsection 42(3)are attracted.   These
provisions  have  no  application unless  according  to	 the
known	and  accepted  business	 notions  and	usages	 the
particular  activity is regarded as a well defined  business
operation.  Activities which are not well defined or are  of
a  casual  or isolated character would not  ordinarily	fall
within	the ambit of this rule.	 Distribution of profits  on
different business operations or activities ought only to be
made for sufficient and cogent reasons and the	observations
made here are limited to the facts and circumstances of this
case.	In a case where all that may be known is that a	 few
transactions  of purchase of raw materials have taken  place
in  British India, it could not ordinarily be said that	 the
isolated acts were in their nature " operations " within the
meaning of that expression.  In this case the raw  materials
were  purchased	 systematically and  habitually	 through  an
established  agency having special skill and  competency  in
selecting the goods to be purchased and fixing the time	 and
place  of purchase.  Such activity appears to us to be	well
within	the  import  of the term " operation "	as  used  insection	 42(3) of the Act.  It is not in the nature  of  an
isolated  transaction  of purchase of  raw  materials.	 The
first contention of the assessee is therefore negatived.
The learned counsel argued in a rather half-hearted  manner
that  there  was no business connection of the	assessee  in
British	 India.	  This contention does not  require  serious
consideration.	 An  isolated  transaction  between  a	non-
resident and a resident in British India without any  course
of dealings such as might fairly be described as a  business
connection  does not attract the application ofsection	 42,
but  when  there is a continuity  of  business	relationship
between	 the person in British India who helps to  make	 the
profits	 and the person outside British India, who  receives
or  realizes the profits, such relationship does  constitute
business connection.  In this case there463was  a regular agency established in British India  for	 the
purchase  of  the  entire raw  materials  required  for	 the
manufacture abroad and the agent was chosen by reason of his
skill, reputation and experience in the line of trade.	 The
terms  of  the	agency stated in by  earlier  part  of	this
judgment fully establish that Messrs.  Best & Co. Ltd.	were
carrying  on  something	 almost akin to the  business  of  a
managing  agency  in India of the foreign  company  and	 the
latter	certainly  had a connection with  this	agency.	  We
therefore negative this contention of the learned counsel as
well.For the reasons given above we uphold the view taken by	 the
High Court and dismiss the appeal with costs.
Appeal dismissed.Agent for the appellant: P. H. Mukherji.Agent for the respondent: G. H. Rajadhyaksha.