Take notes as you read a judgment using ourVirtual Legal Assistantand get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out ourPremium Memberservices --Free for one month.Supreme Court of IndiaBanwari vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 14 February, 1962Equivalent citations: 1962 AIR 1198, 1962 SCR  Supl. (3) 180Author: R DayalBench: Dayal, RaghubarPETITIONER:
BANWARI

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH

DATE OF JUDGMENT:
14/02/1962

BENCH:
DAYAL, RAGHUBAR
BENCH:
DAYAL, RAGHUBAR
KAPUR, J.L.
SARKAR, A.K.

CITATION:
 1962 AIR 1198		  1962 SCR  Supl. (3) 180


ACT:
Criminal, Trial--Three commitment orders for three  offenses -Offenses tri
able at one trial-Sessions Judge recording all
evidence  in one trial-Legality of  trial--Charges-Power  of
Sessions  Judge to substitute charges framed  byCommitting
Magistrate-Murder-Common  Intention Indian Penal Code,	1860
(Act XLV of 1860),s. 34-Codeof Criminal Procedure, 1898 (V
of 1898),ss. 226,234,239,537.



HEADNOTE:
Banwari	 armed with a gun and Ram Charan armed with  an	 axe
were  going together when they met Lakhan.  After some	talk
Banwari	 shot  at and killed Lakhan.   They  then  proceeded
together  for  some distance when they met  Bhagwan.   After
some talk Banwari shot at and killed Bhagwan.  Thereupon the
villagers  started  pursuing them and they ran	and  Banwari
shot  and  injured Narayan.  One report was  lodged  of	 the
three incidents and the police sent up three charge  sheets.
The  Magistrate	 made  three orders  of	 commitment  framing
charges	 against the two appellants unders. 302and  s.307
read withs. 34Indian Penal Code respectively in respect of
the first incident, unders. 302read withs. 34in  respect
of  the second incident and unders. 307read withs. 34in
respect	 of the third incident.	 The Sessions  judge  framed
certain charges describing them as amended charges, unders.
302read withs. 34against both accused for the murder  of
Lakhan,	 under	s.  302 against Banwari for  the  murder  of
Bhagwan and unders. 307, against Banwari for the  attempted
murder	of Narayan.  He recorded the entire evidence in	 one
trial  and  by a common judgment convicted Banwari  and	 Ram
Charan	and sentenced the former to death and the latter  to
imprisonment  for life.	 The appellants contended  that	 the
trials	were  illegal  as  the	procedure  followed  by	 the
Sessions  judge was not warranted by law, that Ram  Charan's
conviction for the murder of Bhagwan and attempted murder of
Narayan	 was bad as he was not tried for those offenses	 and
that the conviction of Ram Charan with the aid ofs. 34was
bad as he had no common intention with Banwari to commit any
of the offenses.
Held, that though the procedure of recording evidence in one
trial  with  respect to offenses which were the	 subject  of
different  trials  was	unwarranted  the  trials  were	 not
vitiated
181
on  this account.  The procedural error 'Was  curable  under
ss. 537of the Codeof Criminal Procedure.
The  three offenses with which the appellants  were  charged
were of the same kind and one joint trial of those  offenses
was justifiable unders. 234Code of Criminal Procedure.   A
joint  trial of both the appellants for the  three  offenses
each  of which was alleged to be committed by  them  jointly
within	twelve months would have been justifiable underss.
231and239of the Code.  Even if there were three committal
orders the Sessions judge could try the accused at one trial
if the provisions ofss. 234to239permitted a joint trial.
In  the present case the Sessions judge did not	 purport  to
consolidate the committal orders and try the accused at	 one
trial  though really that is what actually happened when  he
recorded  evidence in one case only and presumably  examined
the  accused also once.	 The trial was not vitiated  by	 any
procedural  error nor had any prejudice been shown  to	have
been caused to the appellants.Payare	Lal  v. The State of Punjab, (1962)  3	S.C.R.	328,
referred to.
Ram  Charan had been charged for all the offenses for  which
be  was convicted.  The so-called amended charges framed  by
the Sessions judge were really additional charges and not in
substitution  of the charges framed by the Magistrate.	 The
Sessions judge had no power to drop any charges under  which
the accused had been committed for trial ; he could frame  a
charge, or add to or otherwise alter the charge as the	case
may be where a person was committed for try without a charge
or   with  an  imperfect  or  erroneous	 charge.   But	 the
conviction  of	Ram Charan could not be sustained.   He	 did
nothing	 in  any  of the three	incidents.   The  facts	 and
circumstances  of the case did not establish that he  had  a
common intention with Banwarl to commit any of the offenses.
There  was no allegation that he had enmity with any of	 the
victims	 or  that there was any preconcert between  him	 and
Banwari From the fact that he was in the company of  Banwari
all  along no inference of common intention could be  drawn.
The question of his dissociating from Banwari did not  arise
when  he  had not associated himself in the  first  instance
with him.



JUDGMENT:CRIMINAL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION : Criminal Appeal No. 80 of
1961.Appeal	by special leave from the judgment and	order  dated
December 8, 1960 of the Allahabad182High Court in Criminal Appeal No. 1517 of 1960 and  Referred
No. 104 of 1960.A.S.  R.  Chari,  O. P. Rana and K.  K.	 Sinha.	 for  the
appellants.G. C. Mathur and C. P. Lal, for the respondent.
1962.	February  14.	The  Judgment  of the  court   was
delivered by
RAGHUBAR DAYAL, J.-Banwari and Ram Charan appeal, by special
leave,	against	 the  order of	the  Allahabad	High  Court,
dismissing  their appeal and confirming their conviction  by
the 11 Additional Sessions Judge, Etawah.  Banwari was	con-
victed	of the offenses unders. 302Indian Penal  Code	 for
committing the murder of Lakhan Singh and Bhagwan Singh	 and
also  for  an offence unders. 307Indian  Penal  Code,	 for
having	attempted to Commit the murder of Babu	Singh.	 Ram
Charan was convicted of the same three offenses read with
s.34,Indian Penal Code.The  facts leading to the appeal are these, Banwari, a	Lodh
by  caste,  and	 Ram  Charan,  armed  with  a  gun  and	 axe
respectively, passed the field of Lakhan Singh, Lakhan Singh
asked  Banwari	as to where he was going.   Banwari  replied
that he was going for shooting birds.  Lakfian Singh  turned
back.	Banwari	 fired two shots at  Lakhan  Singh.   Lakhan
Singh fell down and died.Banwari	 and Ram Charan, thereafter,  proceeded	 south-wards
and  at	 a  distance of about six  or  seven  furlongs,	 met
Bhagwan	 Singh, who was grazing his cattle.   Bhagwan  Singh
questioned  Banwari as to where he was going.  Banwari	said
he  was	 going to shoot crocodiles in  the  river.   Bhagwan
Singh  said there were no crocodiles in the river and  asked
Banwari to go back and look to his work.  When Bhagwan Singh
turned towards south, Banwari fired a shot at him, Bhagwan183Singh  sat  down.  Banwari again fired a shot  at  him.	  He
further fired two more shots, Bhagwan Singh died.
The  village people pursued the two appellants	and  Banwari
fired  at  them.  He fired at Babu Singh,  but	hit  Narayan
Singh.One report was lodged at the Police Station with respect  to
these  incidents.  The police, after enquiry, sent up  three
charge-sheets under a. 173, Code of Criminal Procedure.	 The
Magistrate  registered three cases, one with respect to	 the
murder	of Lakhan Singh, another with respect to the  murder
of  Bhagwan Singh and the third with respect to the  offence
unders. 307Indian Penal Code, for shooting at Babu  Singh
and Naravan Singh.  Ultimately be committed both the accused
for  trial  to	the Sessions Court in  each  of	 the  cases.
Sessions Trials Nos. 34, 37 and 38 of 1960 were	 registered
on the basis of those three committal orders.
In the case with respect to the murder of Lakhan Singh,	 the
Magistrate  framed  one charge under a.	 302,Indian  Penal
Code, against Banwari and another charge against Ram  Charan
for  an offence unders. 302read withs. 34,Indian  Penal
Code.In  the	 proceedings with respect to the murder	 of  Bhagwan
Singh, he framed one charge against both the accused Banwari
and Ram Charan, for an offence unders. 302read withs. 34,Indian Penal Code.Lastly,	 in the proceedings under s, 307, he again framed  a
common charge against both the accused for an offence  under
a. 307 read withs. 34Indian Penal Code.At the commencement of the hearing of the Sessions Trial No.
34  of 1960 on July 18, 1960, on which date  presumably	 the
other two Sessions184Trials	were  also fixed for hearing; the  learned  Sessions
Judge  framed  certain charges describing  them	 as  amended
charges.   In  Sessions Trial No. 34 of 1960,  he  framed  a
charge	against Banwari and Ram Charan for an offence  under
s. 302 read withs. 34Indian Penal Code with respect to the
murder	of Lakshan Singh.  In Sessions Trial No. 37 of	1960
be  framed  an amended charge against Banwari unders.	 302Indian Penal Code, for his committing the murder of  Bhagwan
Singh.	 In  Sessions  Trial No. 38 of	1960  he  framed  an
amended	 charge against Banwari of an offence unders.	 307Indian Penal Code, for having shot at Babu Singh and Narayan
Singh  with  such  intention  and  knowledge  and  in	such
circumstances that if by that act he had caused the death he
would  have  been  guilty  of  murder.	 He  read  over	 and
explained the amended charges to the accused.
In  the	 proceedings of the Court dated July  18,  1960	 the
learned Sessions Judge noted:"The amended charge was read out in Court	 and
	      explained	  to  the  prisoner  (section	271,Criminal	 Procedure  Code)  who	pleads	 not
	      guilty.The S.T 37/60 and 38/60 are consolidated	with
	      the  case	 and  evidence is  recorded  in	 the
	      present  case (under section 234	Cr..  P.C.).
	      The L.D.G.C. opened his case and examined	 the
	      following witnesses."The  learned  Sessions Judge opened his	 judgment  with	 the
following observation:"Three  Sessions trials Nos. 34, 37 and 38  of
	      1960,  in	 which both Banwari and	 Ram  Charan
	      figure as accused persons, were beard together
	      and  are being disposed of by on(,,  judgment.
	      Banwari  accused stands charged undersection
	      302Indian Penal Code for having committed the
	      murders of Lakhan Singh185and  Bhagwan Singh and also undersection	 307Indian  Penal Code for having made an  attempt
	      to kill Narayan Singh on 12th November,  1959,
	      in   village   Boorhadana,   police    station
	      Dibiapur.	  He  along  with  Ram	Charan	 has
	      further  been charged undersection  302read
	      with  34	and 307 read with 34of	 the  Indian
	      Penal Codefor having in furtherance of  their
	      common  intention committed the above  murders
	      and made an attempt to kill Narayan Singh."In  his	 order	at  the end  of	 the  judgment	the  learned
Additional Sessions Judge said:"'Banwari	  accused  is  found  guilty   undersection  302of the Indian Penal Code for	 the
	      murder  of Lakhan Singh and is  convicted	 and
	      sentenced to death.  He is further found guil-
	      ty undersection 302of the Indian Penal	Code
	      for  the murder of Bhagwan Singh and  is	con-
	      victed  and sentenced to death for this  inci-
	      dent  also.  He shall be. hanged by  the	neck
	      till he be dead.He  is further found guilty undersection	 307of the Indian Penal Code and is convicted	 and
	      sentenced to eight years R.I.The  other accused Ram Charan is found  guilty
	      undersection 302read with 34of the  Indian
	      Penal Codefor the murder of Lakhan Singh	 and
	      is    Convicted	and   sentenced	  to	life
	      imprisonment.   He  is  further  found  guilty
	      undersection 302read with 34of the  Indian
	      Penal Codefor the murder of Bhagwan Singh and
	      is  convicted  and sentenced  to	life  impri-
	      sonment  on  this count also.  He	 is  further
	      found guilty undersection 307read with 34of
	      the  Indian  Penal Codeand is  convicted	 and
	      sentenced	 to five years R. 1.  The  sentences
	      shall run concurrently.  He is in custody	 and
	      shall be detained to serve out his sentences.186This judgment governs all the Sessions  Trials
	      Nos.  34,	 37 and 38 of 60 and a	copy  of  itshall be placed on the records of'S.T. Nos. 37and 38 of .60 ."The  criminal  appeal filed by the appellants  in  the	High
Court  perported  to be an appeal against the order  of	 the
Sessions Judge in Criminal Sessions Trial Nos. 34, 37 and 38
of  60	and the grounds taken in the appeal  were  that	 the
conviction was against the weight of evidence on the record,
that  no  offence  was made out from  the  evidence  of	 the
prosecution witnesses and that the sentence was too severe.
The  High  Court  considered the  case	proved	against	 the
appellants and dismissed their appeal.Mr.  Chari,  for  the appellants, has  urged  the  following
points:(1)  Ram  Charan, appellant, was not tried for the  offenses
of committing the murder of Bhagwan Singh and of  attempting
to  murder  Babu  Singh and Narayan Singh,  as	the  learned
Sessions  Judge	 tried the appellants with respects  to	 the
offenses  mentioned in the amended charges which  were	read
and  explained	by  him to the accused,	 and  therefore	 Ram
Charan's conviction for those two offenses was bad,
(2)  The Sessions Judge conducted three separate  trials  on
the  basis  of	the three commitment  orders,  but  recorded
evidence in one case only i. e., in Sessions Trial No. 34 of
1960.  Such a procedure which in a way amounted to the amal-
gamation  of  the three Sessions Trials into  one,  was	 not
warranted by the provisionof the Codeof Criminal Procedure
and that this error in the mode of trial, being not  curable
under is. 537of the Code; vitiated it.(3)  If the trial be held to be valid, the187sentence of death on Banwari errs on the side of severity.
(4)The	conviction  of Ram Charan is bad as  there  is	no
evidence  on  the  record that	the  various  offenses	were
committed by Banwari in furtherance of the common  intention
of  both  Banwari  and Ram Charan.  In the  absence  of	 any
evidence  about previous concert and of Ram Charan's  having
any  motive to join in the commission of the  offenses,	 the
fact that Ram Charan was with Banwari at the time the  three
offenses were committed is insufficient to convict him .
Mr.  Matbur,  for  the State, has  urged  that	the  learned
Sessions  Judge	 framed amended charges in addition  to	 the
charges	 framed by the Magistrate, that both the  appellants
could  be  legally tried for the various  offence.%  in	 one
trial and that Ram Charan's conviction is correct.
The  first  question therefore to determine is	whether	 the
learned Sessions Judge framed amended charges in addition to
the charges which had been framed by the Magistrate and	 for
the  trial  of	which  the  Magistrate.	 had  committed	 the
appellants to the Court of Sessions, or he substituted those
charges in the place of the ones prepared by the Magistrate.
The  learned  Sessions Judge, in his judgment,	has  clearly
said  in  the paragraphs quoted above, that  Banwari  ,stood
charged for the three offenses simpliciter and also  jointly
with  Ram  Charan for the three offenses read  withs.	 34,Indian Penal Code,.  This clearly indicates that he did	 not
contemplate the amended charges to be in substitution of the
charges framed by the Magistrate.  This is also indicated by
two further facts.The  learned Sessions Judge had no power, underthe Codeof
Criminal  Procedure,  to drop any charges  under  which	 the
accused	 had  been  committed .for trial.   He	can  in	 the
exercise of the powers under188s.   226of the Codeof Criminal Procedure, frame a  charge,
or  add to or otherwise alter the charge as the case may  be
in  oases  where a person is committed for trial  without  a
charge	or  with an imperfect or erroneous charge.   As	 the
Magistrate  had	 not framed a charge unders.	302,Indian
Penal  Code,  simpliciter,  with respect to  the  murder  of
Bhagwan	 Singh and a charge unders. 307,  simpliciter,	 for
attempting  to	murder	Babu Singh and	Narayan	 Singh,	 the
learned	 Sessions Judge thought it necessary to	 frame	such
charges against him and he did an.  Banwari was not  charged
by the Magistrate unders. 302read withs. 34,Indian Penal
Codefor  the offence of committing the  murder  of  Lakhan
Singh  and therefore the Sessions Judge prepared the  charge
against both Banwari and Ram Charan with respect to such  an
offence.   It  is  only this amended  charge  which  was  in
reality	 in  substitution  of  the  charge  framed  by	 the
Magistrate.   Or, it may be said, that this  amended  charge
was the charge framed by the Magistrate, but amended by	 the
Sessions  Judge	 by  adding the name of	 Banwari  among	 the
persons	 charged and altering the language as a	 consequence
of it.Lastly,	 the  final  order of  the  learned  Sessions  Judge
recorded conviction of Banwari for the offenses	 simpliciter
and of Ram Charan for those offenses read withs. 34,Indian
Penal Code.  At that stage, there was no point in  recording
the  conviction of Banwari with respect to the	charges	 for
the various offenses read withs. 34,Indian Penal Code.  It
was'  however,	desirable that at the  commencement  of	 the
trial Banwari charged both for offenses simpliciter and	 for
offenses  read withs. 34,Indian Penal Code, to  avoid	 any
contention in future in case he be convicted for an  offence
with  which he was not actually charged, i. e. convicted  of
an offence read withs. 34,Indian Penal Codewhen there was
no such charge against him or be convic-189ted of an offence simpliciter there being no charge for that
offence.We  are therefore of opinion that there is no force  in	 the
argument  that Ram Charan was convicted of an  offence	with
which he was not charged and tried by the Sessions Judge.
The   learned  Sessions	 Judge	did  not  comply  with	 the
provisions  of	a.  271of the Codeof	 Criminal  Procedure
inasmuch  as  he did not read over and explain	the  charges
framed	by  the	 Magistrate.  This  omission  on  his  part,
however,  does not vitiate, the trial in view ofs.  537of
the  Code  when	 it  is not shown  that	 any  prejudice	 has
resulted to the appellants on account of this omission.
The  procedure	of recording evidence with  respect  to	 the
offenses which were the subject of different Sessions Trials
in  the	 proceedings  of one Sessions Trial  alone,  is	 not
certainly  warranted  by  the  provisionsof  the  Codeof
Criminal  Procedure.   Every  separate	trial  must  proceed
separately with result that every proceeding, including	 the
recording  of  evidence, in each trial should  be  separate.
The  question,	however,  is whether  this  wrong  procedure
adopted	 by  the learned Sessions Judge,  has  vitiated	 the
trial,	irrespective of the fact whether prejudice has	been
caused to the accused or not.It  is	contended for the State that  both  the	 appellants,
Banwari	 and Ram Charan, could have been tried at one  trial
for  the  offenses  they were charged with in  view  of	 the
provisions of as. 234 and 235 oftheCode  ofCriminal
Procedure.  We are of opinionthat the provisions of a.	235
Cr.  P. C.would not have  justified  one  trial	 for   these
offenses.  We do not have the three charge sheets  submitted
by  the	 police to the Magistrate, but the fact	 that  three
charge-sheets  were submitted and that the  Magistrate	made
three  commitment orders indicate that the  prosecution	 did
not come to Court with the allegation that three offenses190were  committed	 in  the course	 of  the  same	transaction.
However, we agree that the provisions ofss. 234and239of
the  Code  of Criminal Procedure would	have  justified	 the
joint  trial  of the appellants for the offenses  they	were
charged with and tried.Section 234allows the trial of a person accused of three or
less  number of offenses of the same kind  committed  within
the  space of twelve months, and provides that	offenses  of
the  same kind are those which are punishable with the	same
amount	of punishment under the same sectionof	 the  Indian
Penal Codeor of any special or local law.  The two offenses
unders. 302with respect to the murder of Lakhan Singh	 and
Bhagwan	 Singh are punishable under the same sectionof	 the
Indian	Penal Codewith the same amount of  punishment.	  In
view  of the proviso tos. 234, an offence of attempting  to
commit an offence is of the same kind as that other offence.
Thus, the offence under a. 307Indian Penal Code, is of	 the
same  kind as the offence unders. 302.	 The three  offenses
of which the appellants were charged, therefore, are of	 the
same  kind  and	 one joint trial  of  those  offenses  would
therefore be justified unders. 234of.the Code.Section	 239lays down the joinder of persons at  one  trial
and  provides that persons accused of more than one  offence
of  the same kind within the meaning of a. 234 committed  by
them  jointly  within  a period of twelve  months  could  be
charged	 and tried together.  Therefore, the trial  of	both
Banwari and Ram Charan for the aforesaid three offenses each
of which was alleged to have been committed by them  jointly
within twelve months, would have been justified.
The  learned Sessions Judge did not, however purport to	 try
the  appellants	 at one trial, As is clear from	 the  record
that  he proceeded with the three trials but  just  recorded
evidence in only one.191It  has	 been  urged that amalgamation	of  three  different
Sessions  Cases	 is not warranted by the provisionsof	 the
Codeof Criminal Procedure.  The Code simply provides by as.
233  to	 239 that ordinarily each distinct offence  must  be
separately  tried except in cases covered by the  provisions
of as. 234  235, 236 and 239.  It is clear that if  separate
commitments  had been made of such distinct offenses,  which
did not come within the exception to a. 233, they could	 not
be  tried at one trial by consolidating those  three  cases.
But  this  does not mean that if there	had.  been  separate
commitments  of	 person who could be tried together  at	 one
trial,	or  of the same person for offences which  could  be
tried together at one trial, the accused could not be  tried
at  one	 trial.	 It often happens that, persons	 accused  of
committing  a particular offence or offenses jointly or	 in
the course of the same transaction are not put up for  trial
at  the same time, usually for the reason that some of	them
were not available.  They may be available later on and sub-
sequently  committed for trial.	 If no trial  has  proceeded
with  respect  to  the first commitment by  that  time,	 the
Sessions Judge is not bound to have two separate trials, one
with  respect to each commitment.  He can certainly try	 all
the  accused  at one trial and in that way  consolidate	 the
proceedings  on	 the  two  committal  orders  in  one.	 The
committal  order just gives the Sessions  Court,  cognizance
over  the  trial of the persons	 committed.   The  committal
order does not bind the Sessions Judge to try those  persons
alone  at  one	trial,	who  have  been	 committed  by	 the
particular  committal order.  The question of the  trial  of
the various committed persons does not depend on the  number
of committal orders, but on the provisions of as. 233 to 239
of  the	 code.	If one trial can be  justified	under  those
provisions  and	 there is no prejudice to the  accused,	 the
Sessions  Judge	 can  certainly	 consolidate  the  committal
orders in those cases and try the accused192at one trial.  He may, for the purpose of the trial, frame a
fresh charge with appropriate counts against the accused, in
substitution of the charges framed by the Magistrate in	 the
different  committal  proceedings If the persons  have	been
committed  by  one  committal order alone  with	 respect  to
different offenses which could not be tried at one trial  in
accordance  with these. sections, the joint trial  of  those
persons	 on those charges would be illegal.  This  makes  it
clear that the validity of a joint trial before the Sessions
Judge is dependent on the fact whether the provisionsof the
Codejustify one joint trial or not.We  therefore hold that though a Sessions Judge cannot	 try
at  one	 trial persons committed under	different  committal
orders	with respect to distinct offenses whose joint  trial
is  not warranted by the provisions of ss.234 to 239of	 the
Code, he is competent to try at one trial persons who can be
tried  at one trial under the provisions of  those  sections
even if there had been separate committal orders.
In the present case, however, the learned Sessions Judge did
not purport to consolidate the committal orders and try	 the
accused	 jointly  at one trial, though really that  is	what
actually happened when he recorded evidence in one case only
and presumably he examined the accused also once.  He  heard
the  arguments	once and he actually  delivered	 one  common
judgment in all the three Sessions Trials.  There  therefore
does not really arise in the present case the question	that
the  Sessions Judge wrongly amalgamated or consolidated	 the
three  Sessions Trials.	 In the circumstances of  this	case
the  trial is not vitiated by any procedural error  nor	 has
any prejudice been shown to have been caused in the  conduct
of the trial or its result.We  have already said that the proceedings in each  separate
trial should be separate and that on193that  basis  the procedure adopted by the  learned  Sessions
Judge  was wrong.  The question for determination, then,  is
whether his following the wrong procedure vitiates the trial
and the conviction of the appellants or is curable unders.
537of the Code.We are of opinion that such a defect does not invalidate the
trial in view ofs. 537of the Code.In.Payare Lal v. The State of Punjab(1) this Court said :"In  regard to this section (s. 537),  it	 was
	      said by the Pi-ivy Council inPulukuri Kottoya
	      v.    King Emperor (L.  R. 74 1. A. 65), at p.
	      75,
	      ,"When  a	 trial	is  conducted  in  a  manner
	      different	 from  that proscribed bythe	Code(,,is  in N. A. Subramania Iyer's case, L.  R.
	      28  T.A.	257),  the  trial  is  bad,  and  no
	      question of curing an irregularity arises; but
	      if the trial is conducted substantially in the
	      manner  prescribed  bythe  Code,  but	some
	      irregularity  occurs  in the  course  of	such
	      conduct,	the irregularity can be cured  undersection 537, and none the less so because	 the
	      irregularity  involves, as must Pearly  always
	      be  the case, a breach of one or more  of	 the
	      very comprehensive provisionsof the Code.'
	      It seems to us that the case falls within	 the
	      first   category	mentioned  by	the   Pi,ivy
	      Council.	 This is not a case of	irregularity
	      but want of competency."As  already  held,  the impugned procedure  adopted  by	 the
learned Sessions Judge in the, present case does not  relate
to  the competency of the Court to try the various  offenses
at one trial.(1) [1962] 3 S.C.R 328.194The  amendment	made in a. 537of the Codebythe  CodeofCriminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1955 (Act XXVI of  1955)
does  not in any way go in favour of the appellants  as	 the
result of the amendment is that the Scope, of s.537 is	made
wider, covering cases of misjoinder of charges as well.
We therefore hold that the trial of the appellants bad	been
valid.Banwari	 has  been sentenced to death unders.	 302Indian
Penal Code.  Mr. Chari urges that Banwari must have shot  at
Lakhan Singh as a result of the latter giving provocation as
alleged by Banwari in his statement as, otherwise, there was
no  motive for his shooting at Lakhan Singh and that  there-
fore  the lesser penalty for the offence of murder would  be
the  proper  Sentence against him.  We do  not	agree.	 The
Courts	 below	 disbelieved  Banwari's	  version   of	 the
conversation  with Lakhan Singh.  Even if that	conversation
be believed, we do not think that  should have provoked	 him
to such an extent that he should have fired at Lakhan  Singh
not  only once, but also a second time.	 There could  be  no
justification  for  his firing at Bhagwan Singh who  is	 not
said  to  have given any provocation  even.   Banwari  fired
several shots at Bhagwan Singh.	 In the circumstances, we do
not see any reason to consider the sentence of death to.  be
unjustified and to reduce it.So  far as Ram Charan is concerned, we are of  opinion	that
his  conviction cannot be sustained.  He did nothing at	 Any
of  the	 three	incidents.  His conduct	 in  remaining	with
Banwari throughout cannot lead to any conclusion that he had
common	intention with Banwari to shoot at Lakhan  Singh  or
Bhagwan Singh or Babu Singh and Narain Singh, what to say of
his  having  a common intention with Banwari to	 commit	 the
murder of the first two.It  is not the case of the prosecution that Banwari and	 Ram
Charan had any enmity with any of195the victims or that they had prearranged between  themselves
to  pick up any sort of conversation or quarrel with  Lakban
Singh  or Bhagwan Singh and then to shoot at them.  All	 the
incidents happened by accident.	 If Lakhan Singh and Bbagwan
Singh  had not questioned Banwari, probably,  nothing  would
have  happened.	  They questioned him and  for	some  reason
Banwari fired at them.	He might have considered that  their
questions  to him as to where he was going was	an  indirect
reference to his going armed and a sort of reflection on his
possessing a gun.The  Courts lbeow imputed common intention to Ram Charan  on
account	  of  his  not	disassociating	himself	  from	 the
activities  of Banwan.	The question of	 disassociation	 did
not  arise when he had not associated himself in  the  first
instance  with Banwari's activities.  He was  probably	much
bewildered  at	the conduct of Banwari	in  shooting  Lakhan
Singh down as Lakhan Singh or any one else would have  been.
After  the  shooting of Lakhan Singh both  Banwari  and	 Ram
Charan	are said to have just proceeded towards	 the  south.
It was after Bhagwan Singh had been shot dead that they took
to  their  heels.  Ram Charan could not have  anticipated  a
second incident with Bhagwan Singh.  There was no reason for
their  prearranging  the  shooting of  Bhagawan	 Singh,	 Ram
Charan's  running away simultaneously with the running	away
of  Banwari after the shooting of Bhagwan Singh	 could	have
been  motivated by the instinct of saving himself  from	 the
villagers who could have thought that he was a party to	 the
various incidents.  When Courts could consider his  presence
in  that  light, the villagers could have thought  on  those
lines much more easily.	 His running away, therefore, is  no
indication  of his guilty conscience.  It was the result  of
his  anticipating popular reaction.  In	 the  circumstances,
his possessing an axe at the time was not for committing any
violence against Lakhan Singh or the196other  victims.	  He had it with him either as a  matter  of
course	or for doing the work he might have been doing	that
day.  We are therefore of the opinion that Ram Charan had no
common	intention  with	 Banwari in  his  acts	towards	 the
various victims of the incident and that he has been wrongly
convicted.We  therefore  dismiss the appeal of Banwari and  allow	 the
appeal	of Ram Charan and acquit the latter of the  offenses
he has been convicted of.Appeal partly allowed.