Take notes as you read a judgment using ourVirtual Legal Assistantand get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out ourPremium Memberservices --Free for one month.Supreme Court of IndiaChandi Prasad Singh vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 7 December, 1955Equivalent citations: 1956 AIR  149, 1955 SCR  (2)1035Author: T V AiyyarBench: Aiyyar, T.L. VenkataramaPETITIONER:
CHANDI PRASAD SINGH

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
THE STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH.

DATE OF JUDGMENT:
07/12/1955

BENCH:
AIYYAR, T.L. VENKATARAMA
BENCH:
AIYYAR, T.L. VENKATARAMA
BOSE, VIVIAN

CITATION:
 1956 AIR  149		  1955 SCR  (2)1035


ACT:
Trial before Sessions Judge for an offence under s. 409,  I.
P. C. with the aid of assessors for misappropriating certain
sums  of  money	 from three  different	persons-Received  by
appellant as Secretary of a Company-And for an offence under
s.  477-A,I.P.C. for falsifying a minute book-With the	 aid
of Jury-Same persons acting as assessors and  jurors-Verdict
of  not guilty in respect of both charges-Disagreement	with
verdict	 of  jury unders. 477-Aand reference to  the	High
Court  unders. 307of the Code of  Criminal  Procedure-Dis-
agreement  with	 the opinion of assessors unders.  409and
conviction  of accused-Appeal to the High  Court-Appeal	 and
reference  both	 heard	together  and  disposed	 of  by	 one
judgment  by High Court-Sessions Judge	whether	 contravened
any provision of law or committed illegality in acting as he
did-Appellant's status-Whether that of a servant or that  of
an  agent-Servant  and	agent-Distinction  between-Appellant
charged with three offences unders. 409,I.P.C. and one of-
fence unders. 477-A,I.P.C.-Whether contravention ofs. 234of  the	 Code of Criminal Procedure-S. 235of  the  Codeof
Criminal Procedure-Applicability of.



HEADNOTE:
The  appellant was tried by the Sessions Judge with the	 aid
of  assessors  for  an	offence unders.  409,I.P.C.	 for
misappropriating certain sums of money received as  promoter
of  a Company from three ,different persons for the  purpose
of  allotment of shares and omitted to be brought  into	 the
Company	 after it was formed, and also for an offence  under
s. 477-A,I.P.C. by the same Sessions Judge with the aid  of
a jury for the offence of falsifying a minute book, the same
persons acting both as assessors and jurors.  They  returned
a verdict of not guilty in respect of both the charges.	 The
Sessions  Judge,  disagreeing with the verdict of  the	jury
unders. 477-A, referred the matter to the High Court  under
s. 307of the Codeof Criminal Procedure.  Disagreeing	also
with  the opinion of the assessors in respect of the  charge
unders.  409,I.P.C. he held	 the  appellant	 guilty	 and
sentenced  him to 4 years' rigorous  imprisonment.   Against
this  conviction the appellant appealed to the	High  Court.
Both  the  reference unders. 307of the  Code	of  Criminal
Procedure  and	the appeal were heard together by  the	High
Court  which confirmed the appellant's conviction  unders.
409and  the  sentence passed by  the	Sessions  Judge	 and
disagreeing with the verdict of the jury it held him  guilty
unders.  477-Aand sentenced him to  two  years'  rigorous
imprisonment.	On  appeal by special leave to	the  Supreme
Court:-
Held  (i) that the contention that when the  Sessions  Judge
disagreed  with the verdict of the jury and the	 opinion  of
the assessors,
1036
he  should have referred the whole case unders. 307of	 the
Code of Criminal Procedure to the High Court and not  merely
that part of it which related to the charge unders.  477-A,I.P.C.	was  without force because the	Sessions  Judge	 had
contravened no provision of law and committed no  illegality
in  deciding the case which related to the charge  unders.
409,I.P.C. Thats. 307, Code of Criminal Procedure  applies
in terms only to trials by a jury and the Sessions Judge had
no  power under that section to refer cases tried  with	 the
aid of assessors for the decision of the High Court.  In the
present case there was the further fact that both the appeal
against	 the  conviction  unders.  409,I.P.C.  and	 the
reference unders. 307of the Code of Criminal Procedure  in
respect of the charge unders. 477-Awere disposed of by the
same judgment;
(ii)that the contention that the appellant's true status was
that  of  a  servant and not that of an agent  and  that  he
should have been tried not unders. 409,I.P.C. but unders.
408,I.P.C. was also without force inasmuch as	 his  status
was  that of an agent and not that of a servant in  view  of
his  duties  as Secretary of the Society.   The	 distinction
between	 the  two is this a servant acts  under	 the  direct
control and supervision of the master, and is bound to	con-
form to all reasonable orders given to him in the course  of
his work. An agent though bound to exercise his authority in
accordance  with all lawful instructions which may be  given
to him from time to time by his principal, is not subject in
its  exercise  to the direct control or supervision  of	 the
principal;
(iii)that the contention that there had been violation ofs.
234of the Code of Criminal Procedure in that the  appellant
had  been charged with three offences unders.	409,I.P.C.
and  one unders. 477-Awas also without force as  the	case
was governed bys. 235of the Code of Criminal Procedure  as
the  several  offences unders. 409,I.P.C.  ands.  477-A,I.P.C.	arose  out of the same acts and formed part  of	 the
same transaction.Emperor v. Haria Dhobi, (A.I.R. 1937 Patna 662), Pachaimuthu
In  re,	 ([1932]  I.L.R. 55 Mad. 715),Emperor	 v.  Lachman
Gangota,  (A.I.R.  1934	 Patna	424),Emperor	v.  Kalidas,
([1898] 8 Bom.	L.R. 599), Emperor v. Vyankat Sing ([1907] 9
Bom.   L.R.  1057) andEmperor v. Chanbasappa(A.I.R.	1932
Bom. 61), referred to.



JUDGMENT:CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 150  of
1954.On  appeal  by leave from the judgment and order  dated	 the
23rd March 1954 of the Allahabad High Court (Lucknow  Bench)
in  Criminal Appeal No. 112 of 1953 connected with  Criminal
Reference  Register  No.  15  of 1953  arising	out  of	 the
judgment and order dated the 24th February 1953 in  Sessions
Trial No. 5 of 1952 of the Sessions Court at Lucknow.1037B, B. Tawakley, (K.  P. Gupta and A. D. Mathur with him) for
the appellant.S.P. Sinha (K.	 B. Asthana and C. P. Lal with him) for	 the
respondent.1955.	December 7. The Judgment of the Court was  delivered
by
VENKATARAMA  AYYAR  J.-This is an appeal  by  special  leave
against	 the  judgment	of  the	 High  Court  of   Allahabad
affirming  the conviction of the appellant by  the  Sessions
Judge,	Lucknow undersections 409and477-Aof	 the  Indian
Penal Code.On 12-2-1949 a Society known as the Model Town	Co-operative
Housing	 Society, Ltd., was registered under the  provisions
of  theCo-operative Societies Act(II of 1912), its  object
being to acquire vacant sites in the town of Lucknow and  to
allot  them  to its members so as to enable  them  to  build
houses	of their own.  The appellant was the chief  promoter
thereof, and collected monies from prospective	shareholders
by  way of share money.	 The first general body	 meeting  of
the  Society  was held on 1-3-1949.  At	 that  meeting,	 the
appellant  was elected Honorary Secretary and one Sri  Munna
Lal Tewari as Treasurer.  The latter having resigned, one S.
C.  Varma  was appointed Treasurer in his stead.   On  22-4-
1949,  there  was a meeting of the  Managing  Committee,  at
which  the appellant was directed to band over the  accounts
of  the	 Society and its funds to its  Treasurer.   The	 ap-
pellant gave a list of 38 persons as members of the Society,
delivered cheques issued by 13 of them as their share money,
and paid a sum of Rs. 3,500 being the amount stated to	have
been  received	by him from the other 25  members  as  share
money.	The Society did not function thereafter.
On  16-7-1949  some  of the members wrote a  letter  to	 the
Registrar  of Co-operative Societies pointing out  that	 the
Society had not functioned ever since its incorporation, and
asking	that  steps might be taken for	examination  of	 its
accounts  and,	if necessary, for its being  wound  up.	  On
this,  there  was  an investigation of the  affairs  of	 the
Society by two Assistant1038Registrars,  and on the basis of their reports	dated  22-2-
1950  and  18-5-1950  the present  prosecution	was  started
against	 the appellant charging him undersections  409and477-Aof the Indian Penal Code.  The charge  undersection
409was that he had received a sum of Rs. 500 from one	 Sri
Chaturvedi,  a	sum  of Rs. 100 from Dr. 0.  P.	 Bhanti	 and
another	 sum  of Rs. 100 from Dr. R. S. Seth, all  as  share
money in December 1948, and that he had misappropriated	 the
same.  The charge undersection 477-Awas that on  22-4-1949
the  appellant	acting	as  the	 Secretary  of	the  Society
falsified the minute book, Exhibit P-18, by omitting to show
therein	 the  share money received from	 the  three  persons
above mentioned.  The defence of the appellant was that	 the
three amounts aforesaid were paid to him not as	 prospective
Secretary  for the purpose of allotment of shares, but	were
deposited with him in his individual capacity for purchasing
shares, in case the Society worked well.The trial of the offence undersection 409was held with the
aid  of assessors and that undersection 477-Awith the	 aid
of  a  jury, the same persons acting both as  assessors	 and
jurors,	 and  they  returned a verdict of  not	guilty	with
reference  to  the  charges under both	the  sections.	 The
Sessions  Judge,  disagreeing with the verdict of  the	jury
undersection 477-A, referred the matter to the High  Court
undersection	307of the Code of Criminal  Procedure.	  He
also  disagreed	 with  the opinion  of	the  assessors	with
reference to the charge undersection 409, and held that the
appellant  was	guilty	and sentenced  him  to	four  years'
rigorous  imprisonment	and a fine of Rs.  1,000,.   Against
this  conviction, the appellant preferred an appeal  to	 the
High  Court.  Both the reference undersection 3O7and	 the
appeal	were heard together by the High Court, which  agreed
with the Sessions Judge that the appellant had received	 the
three  amounts	as  share  money  and  in  his	capacity  as
Secretary,  and accordingly confirmed his  conviction  undersection	 409and the sentence passed by the Sessions  Judge.
Disagreeing  with the verdict of the jury, it also held	 him
guilty undersection 477-Aand sentenced him to1039two  years'  rigorous imprisonment.  The present  appeal  by
special leave is directed against this judgment.
Mr.  Tawakley  firstly	contended that the  finding  of	 the
courts	below that the amounts paid by Sri  Chaturvedi,	 Dr.
Bhanti and Dr. Seth were paid as share money was  erroneous,
and in support of this contention relied on a letter written
by  one of them, Dr. Seth, to the appellant on 3rd May	1951
(Ex.   D-5) in which it was stated that the amount was	paid
on  the	 express understanding that if the  Society  ran,  a
share would be allotted to him and otherwise the money would
be returned.  This letter was written long after proceedings
had  been taken by the Registrar, and the courts  below	 did
not  attach  much importance to it. On the other  hand,	 Dr.
Seth  himself  gave  evidence  in  these  proceedings  which
deprives Exhibit D-5 of very much of its value.	 Exhibit  P-
10  is the receipt granted to Sri Chaturvedi.  It  expressly
recites	 that Rs. 500 was received as share money  for	five
shares in the Society.	Notices were also issued to both Sri
Chaturvedi and Dr. Bhanti to attend the general body meeting
of the Society to be held on 1st March 1949 for electing the
President  and	members	 of the Managing  Committee  of	 the
Society,  and Dr. Seth and Dr Bhanti actually  attended	 it.
Sri Chaturvedi and Dr. Bhanti have also given evidence	that
they  paid  the amounts only as share capital.	 The  courts
below accepted the above evidence, and held that the  moneys
were  not paid to the appellant in his individual  capacity.
There are no grounds for disturbing that finding in  special
appeal.It is now necessary to deal with the several contentions  of
law  urged by Mr. Tawakley in support of this  appeal.	 His
first contention was that when the Sessions Judge  disagreed
with  the  verdict of the jury and with the opinion  of	 the
assessors,  he	should have referred the  whole	 case  undersection	 307for  the decision of the High  Court  and	 not
merely	that  part of it which related to the  charge  undersection	 477-A, and that his failure to do so  vitiated	 the
conviction.   He argued that when the same facts  constitute
two1040distinct  offences, one of which is triable with the aid  of
jurors	and  the other with assessors, and  the	 accused  is
charged	 with  both, the reference undersection  307must
relate	to  both the charges, if  inconsistent	findings  by
different courts with reference to the same matter is to  be
avoided.   What would happen, he asked, if, in	the  present
case,  the  appellant  did not file an	appeal	against	 his
conviction undersection 409, but the High Court came to the
conclusion  in	the  reference undersection  307that	 Sri
Chaturvedi, Dr. Bhanti and Dr. Seth did not pay the  amounts
to  the	 appellant as share money, and that no	offence	 had
been  committed by him undersection 477-A?  The  conviction
of  the appellant undersection 409based on the finding  of
the  Sessions  Judge that those amounts were paid  as  share
money would stand, notwithstanding that it would be  against
the  decision  of  the High Court.  This  anomaly  could  be
avoided,  it is argued, by holding that the reference  undersection 307must be of the whole case.Reliance  is  placed in support of this	 contention  on	 the
observations inEmperor v. Haria Dhobi(1).  We are unable to
agree with this contention.  If the procedure adopted by the
Sessions  Judge is to be held to be illegal, it can only  be
on  the	 ground that he contravened some  provision  of	 law
which  requires	 him  to refer the whole case  to  the	High
Court.	 It  is	 conceded that the  only  provision  of	 law
dealing	 with this matter issection 307.  But that  section
applies	 in  terms only to trials with the aid	of  a  jury.
There  is therefore no power in the Sessions Court to  refer
cases  tried with the aid of assessors for decision  of	 the
High  Court under that section.	 That was the view taken  in
Pachaimuthu  In re(2), where it was held that the  Assistant
Sessions  Judge had no jurisdiction to refer  undersection
307the whole case to the High Court, that he should himself
dispose	 of the charges which were triable with the  aid  of
assessors,  and	 that  the reference  in  respect  of  those
charges	 was bad.  This decision was followed inEmperor  v.
Lachman(1)  A.I.R. 1937 Patna 66
(2)  [1932] I.L R. 55 Mad 715.1041Gangota(1).   The same view has also been taken by the	High
Court  of  Bombay  in a number of  cases:  Vide	 Emperor  v.
Kalidas(2),  Emperor  v.  Vyankat  Sing(3)  andEmperor  v.
Chanbasappa(4).	  We  are accordingly of  opinion  that	 the
Sessions Judge had contravened no provision of law, and	 had
committed  no illegality in deciding the case, in so far  as
it related to the charge undersection 409, himself In	this
case there is the further fact that the appellant  preferred
an  appeal against his conviction undersection 409by	 the
Sessions  Judge,  and that appeal was heard along  with	 the
reference  undersection 307in respect of the charge  undersection	 477-A, and that they were both of them disposed  of
by the same judgment.It was next contended that the true status of the  appellant
was  that  of  a servant and not of an agent,  and  that  he
should	have  been charged not undersection 409but  undersection	 408.	The  substance of  the	charge	against	 the
appellant  is that as the promoter of a Society he  lawfully
received the amounts paid by Sri Chaturvedi, Dr. Bhanti	 and
Dr.  Seth, but that after its incorporation, when he  failed
on 22-4-1949 to hand over those amounts to the Treasurer and
to include their names as shareholders in the minutes  book,
he  committed offences undersections 409and477-A.	Now,
what  is  the status of the appellant as  Secretary  of	 the
Society in which capacity he committed the offences, servant
or agent?  The distinction between the two is thus stated in
Halsbury's Laws of England, Volume 22, page 113, para 192-
"A, servant acts under the direct control and supervision of
the master, and is bound to conform to all reasonable orders
given him in the course of his work........ An agent  though
bound  to  exercise  his authority in  accordance  with	 all
lawful	instructions which may be given to him from time  to
time by his principal, is not subject in its exercise to the
direct control or supervision of the principal".
Having	regard to the nature of the duties of the  appellant
as the Secretary of the Society, we are clearly
(1)  A.I.R. 1934 Patna 424.(3)  [1907] 9 Bom.  L.R. 1057.(2)  [1898] 8 Bom.  L.R. 599.(4)  A.I.R. 1932 Bom. 61.1042of  opinion that his status was that of an agent and  not  a
servant.  Moreover, whether the appellant should be  charged
undersection 408orsection 409is of no importance in	 the
present	 case, as the sentence imposed on him undersection
409,  viz.,  four  years'  rigorous  imprisonment  could  be
maintained  even  undersection 408.  It was argued  by	 the
appellant that an offence undersection 408was triable with
the  aid  of  a jury, whereas that  undersection  409was
triable	 with  the aid of assessors, and that  he  had	been
prejudiced  in	that be bad lost the benefit of a  trial  by
jury.  But this objection was not taken in the trial  court,
and  is	 not  now open.	 Videsection 536of  the  Code  of
Criminal Procedure.It  is	next contended that there has been  a  violation  ofsection	 234of the Code of Criminal Procedure in  that	 the
appellant had been charged with three offences undersection
409and one undersection 477-A.  But the case is  governed
bysection 235, as the several offences undersections	 409and477-Aarise out of the same acts and form part  of	 the
same  transaction.  Moreover, the appellant. has  failed  to
show  any  prejudice  as  required  bysection	 537.	This
objection must accordingly be overruled.
It  was	 finally  contended that there had  been  no  proper
examination  of	 the appellant undersection 342,  and	that
therefore  the conviction was illegal.	This  objection	 was
not  raised in the Courts below, and is sought to be  raised
in  this  Court by a supplemental proceeding.	We  find  no
substance in this objection.In the result, this appeal fails and is dismissed.1043