Take notes as you read a judgment using ourVirtual Legal Assistantand get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out ourPremium Memberservices --Free for one month.Supreme Court of IndiaCommissioner Of Income-Tax, ... vs Jayalakshmi Rice And Oil Mills ... on 15 January, 1971Equivalent citations: 1971 AIR 1015, 1971 SCR  (3) 365Author: A GroverBench: Grover, A.N.PETITIONER:
COMMISSIONER OF INCOME-TAX, ANDHRA PRADESH,HYDERABAD

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
JAYALAKSHMI RICE AND OIL MILLS CONTRACTOR CO.

DATE OF JUDGMENT15/01/1971

BENCH:
GROVER, A.N.
BENCH:
GROVER, A.N.
SHAH, J.C.
HEGDE, K.S.

CITATION:
 1971 AIR 1015		  1971 SCR  (3) 365
 1971 SCC  (1) 280
 CITATOR INFO :
 E	    1984 SC 684	 (34)


ACT:Income-tax   Act,   1922,s.	26A-Income-tax	 Rules,	  r.
2(b)--Indian Partnership Act, 1932,ss. 58,59,69-Rule2(b)providing   that  in  respect  of  firms  registered   underPartnership Actthe application for registration of firm u/s
26A  of the Income-tax Actshall be made before the  end  of
the  previous year-Firm can be said to be  registered  underPartnership Actnor on date of receipt of application  under
ss. 58 but when entry is made in register of firms unders.
59-Ifsuch  an entry is made after end of  'previous  year'
firm  is not registered under the Partners-ship Act for	 the
purpose of r. 2(b).



HEADNOTE:
The   assessee	firm  was  constituted	under  a   deed	  of
partnership  dated  October 6, 1955.  It was  to  come	into
existence  with effect from November 5, 1954.  The  assessee
filed	an  application	 under	s.  26A	 of  the   Actfor
registration  of the firm for the assessment  year  1956-57.
The  previous year of the firm was shown as the year  ending
October	 26,  1955.   The application was  received  by	 the
Income-tax Officer on October 14, 1955.	 On October 20, 1955
the assessee filed before the Registrar of Firms a statement
unders.  58of  the Indian  Partnership  Act,  1932.	  On
November 2, 1955 the Registrar of Firms filed the  statement
of  the assessee and made entries in the register of  firms.
On  March  23, 1961 the Income-tax Officer passed  an  order
refusing to register the firm unders. 26-6A. inter-alia for
the  reason that the application had not been made in  time.
The  appeal  taken to the Appellate  Assistant	Commissioner
failed.	   The	Tribunal  also	upheld	the  order  of	 the
authorities below.  In reference the High Court answered the
question  in  favour  of  the  assessee	 holding  that	 the
partnership should be deemed to have been registered on	 the
date  when  the	 application  was  presented  and  that	 the
requirement of r. 2(b) of the Rules would be satisfied if it
became	registered under thePartnership Acteven after	 the
'application  unders.	 26Awas filed.	 in  appeal  by	 the
Revenue.
HELD : (i) The view taken by the High Court was not correct.
Under  the  Partnership	 law it can be taken  to  have	been
settled by decision,-, of High Courts, from a long time that
the  registration  of firm takes place only  when  necessary
entries are made in the register of firms unders. 59of the
Partnership Act by the Registrar.Section 58of the Act  no
doubt  employs	language which, without	 anything  more	 may
appear to lend support to the view that the registration  of
a  firm	 may be effected merely by  sending  an	 application
which would mean that as soon as an application is sent	 and
if entry is made unders. 59pursuant to it the registration
would  be effective from the date when the  application	 was
presented.  Buts. 58(2)is not to be read in isolation	 and
has  to	 be considered along with the scheme  of  the  other
provisions  of	the  Act viz. ss. 59  and  69.	 The  latter
section	 which	deals with the	effect	of  non-registration
throws	light  on what was contemplated by  the	 Legislature
with  regard  to the point of time when the  firm  could  be
regarded as registered. [368C-G]
Ram  Prasad  v. Kamta Prasad, A.I.R. 1935 All.	898,  Danmal
Parshomadas v. Baburam Chhotelal, I.L.R. [1936] 58 All.	 495
andKerala Road Lines Corporation v. Commissioner of Income-
tax, Kerala 51 I.T.R. 711, approved.
366
(ii) The views expressed by the Special Committee  appointed
by the Government of India in respect of the Bill which came
to  be passed by the Central Legislative as thePartnership
Actwere  irrelevant  for the	purpose	 of  construing	 the
provisions of the Act. [1369B]



JUDGMENT:CIVIL  APPELLATE JURISDICTION :	   Civil Appeal No.  545  of
1967.Appeal	from the judgment and order dated April 15, 1966  of
the  Andhra  Pradesh High Court in Case Referred No.  40  of
1963.S.   C.	 Manchanda,  B. D. Sharma and R.  N.  Sachthey,	 for
the .appellant.K. Rajendra Chaudhuri, for the respondent.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
Grover,	 J. This is an appeal from a judgment of the  Andhra
Pradesh High Court arising out of a reference made underS.
66(1)of the Income-tax Act, 1922, hereinafter	 called	 the
'Act'  of  the	question whether on the	 facts	and  in	 the
circumstances  of the case the application unders.  26Aof
the Act was filed out of time
The facts are not in dispute.  The assessee firm was consti-
tuted under a deed of partnership dated October 6, 1955.  It
was  to	 come into existence with effect  from	November  5,
1954.  The assessee filed an application underS. 26Aof the
Act  for  registration of the firm for the  assessment	year
1956-57.   The 'previous year' of the firm was shown as	 the
year,  ending  October	26,  1955.   This  application	 was
received by the Income-tax Officer on October 14, 1955.	 On
October 20. 1955 the assessee filed before the Registrar  of
Firms a statement unders. 58of the Indian Partnership	 Act
1932.  On November 2, 1955 the Registrar of Firms filed	 the
statement of the assessee and made entries in the  registrar
of  firms.  On March 23, 1961 the Income-tax Officer  passed
an  order refusing to register the firm unders.  26Ainter
alia, for the reason that the application had not been	made
in  time.   The	 appeal taken  to  the	Appellate  Assistant
Commissioner   by  the	assessee  failed.   The	  Income-tax
Appellate  Tribunal also upheld the order of the  Income-tax
Officer and the Appellate Assistant Commissioner.  On that a
reference  was	sought	and  the  High	Court  answered	 the
question-referred  in favour of the asses,see on the  ground
that the application had been filed in time.Section	 26Aof the Act provides that an application may  be
made  to  the  Income-tax  Officer on  behalf  of  any	firm
constituted  under an instrument of  partnership  specifying
the  individual shares of the partners for registration	 for
the purposes of the Act.  The application has to be made  by
such  person or persons and at such time and has to  contain
such particulars etc. as may be367prescribed.   Rules 2 to 6(b) of the Rules made unders.  59of  the	 Act  deal  with  registration	of  firms.   We	 are
concerned with the following material portion of Rule 2."Such  application shall........	    be	....
	      made ....(a)   Where  the firm is not registered  under
	      theIndian Partnership Act, 1932 (IX of  1932)
	      or  or  where the deed of Partnership  is	 not
	      registered under the Indian Registration	Act,
	      1908  (XVI of 1908), and the  application	 for
	      registration is being made for the first	time
	      under the Act,(i)   Within  a  period of six months  of	 the
	      constitution of the firm or before the end  of
	      the  'previous year' of the firm whichever  is
	      earlier,	if the firm was constituted in	that
	      previous year,(ii)  before  the end of the previous year  in
	      any other case;(b)   Where  the firm is registered under	 theIndian Partnership Act, 1932 (IX of 1.932)  or
	      where  the need of partnership  is  registered
	      under  the  Indian Registration  Act  (XVI  of
	      1908) before, the end of the previous year  of
	      the firm........"Now   it   is  common  ground  that  the   application	 for
registration  was not made within the period  prescribed  by
rule 2(a).  What has been urged throughout on behalf of	 the
assessee  is that the application to the Income-tax  Officer
was governed by rule 2(b) and was in time as the firm should
be  deemed to have been registered not on the date on  which
it  was	 actually registered by the Registrar of  Firms	 but
with  effect  from  the date on which  the  application	 for
registration was presented to the Registrar.  In other words
the  firm  should be considered to have been  registered  on
October 20, 1955 on which date the statement unders. 58of
the  Partnership  Act was filed by the assessee	 before	 the
Registrar of Firms.The real question which has to be determined is whether	 the
registration of a firm under thePartnership Acttakes place
with  effect  from  the date on which  the  application	 for
registration is made in accordance withs. 58of that	Act.Section	 58( 1 ) provides that the registration of a	firm
may be effected at any time by sending by post or delivering
to the Registrar of the area in which any place of  business
of  the	 firm  is  situated or proposed	 to  be	 situated  a
statement in the prescribed form and accom-368panied	by  the prescribed fee stating........ UnderS.  59when the Registrar is satisfied that the provisions ofS. 58have been duly complied with he shall record an entry of the
statement in a registrar called the "register of firms'	 and
shall file the statement.In Ram Prasad v. Kamta  Prasad(1)
it  was laid down that the registration of a firm under	 the
Pertnership Act takes place only when the necessary entry is
made  in  the  register of firms, Even unders.	 69of	 the
Partnership  Act  which	 deals	with  the  effect  of	non-
registration   it  has	been  consistently  held  that	 the
registration of a firm subsequent to the filing of the	suit
did not cure the defect; See Danmal Parshotamdas v.  Baburam
Chhotelal(2).	Thus  under the Partnership law	 it  can  be
taken to have been settled by decisions of High Courts	from
a long time that the registration of a firm takes place only
when  the necessary entry is made in the register  of  firms
unders. 59of the Partnership Act by the Registrar.  It  is
true  that sub-section (1) ofs. 58employs  language  which
without anything more may land support to the view that	 the
registration of a firm may be effected merely by sending  an
application which would mean that as soon as an	 application
is sent and if entry is made unders. 59pursuant to it	 the
registration  would  be	 effective from the  date  when	 the
application  was presented.  Buts. 58(1)is not to be	read
in isolation and has to be considered along with the  scheme
of the other provisions of the Act, namely,s. 59ands. 69.
The  latter  section may not have a direct  bearing  on	 the
point  under our consideration but it throws light  on	what
was contemplated by the legislature with regard to the point
of time when the firm could be regarded as registered.	 The
Kerala	High Court has inKerala Road Lines  Corporation  v.
Commissioner of Income-tax, Kerala(1), clearly expressed the
view  that readingss. 58and59of the	 Indian	 Partnership
Act together a firm cannot be said to be registered when the
statement prescribed bys. 58and the required fee are	sent
to  the Registrar and that the registration of the  firm  is
effected  only when the 'entry of the statement is  recorded
in the registrar of firms and the statement is field by	 the
Registrar  as  provided	 ins. 59.  In	that  case  also  an
identically   similar	question   arose   in	respect	  of
registration of a firm unders. 26Aof the Income-tax Act.
The High Court in the judgment under appeal referred to	 the
statement extracted from the report of the Special Committee
which  had  been  appointed by the Government  of  India  to
examine	 the  provisions of the Bill before it	came  to  be
passed by the Central Legislature as thePartnership Actand
reference  was made in particular to the statement  relating
to clause 58 corresponding
(1) AIR[1935]Al1.898.	 (2) I.L.R.[1936] 58ALL.495.
(3)  51 I.T.R. 71 1.369toS.	59of the Partnership Act to the  effect  that	 the
Registrar  was a mere recording officer and that he  had  no
discretion  but	 to  record the entry in  the  registrar  of
firms.	 We  are unable to see how that	 statement,  can  be
taken into consideration for the purpose of interpreting the
relevant provisions of thePartnership Act.. We Also  cannot
concur with the other reasoning of the High Court for coming
to  the conclusion that the partnership should be deemed  to
have  been registered on the date when the application	was,
presented  and	that the requirement of rule 2(b)  would  be
satisfied if it became registered under thePartnership	 Acteven after the: application was filed.For  the reasons given above the appeal is allowed  and	 the
judgment of the High Court is set aside.  The answer to	 the
question  referred  must  be given in  the  affirmative	 and
against	 the, assessee.	 The appellant shall be entitled  to
costs in this Court.G.C.						      Appeal
allowed'.
10-L807Sup.  CI/71370