Take notes as you read a judgment using ourVirtual Legal Assistantand get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out ourPremium Memberservices --Free for one month.Supreme Court of IndiaDelhi Administration vs Ram Singh on 3 May, 1961Equivalent citations: 1962 AIR   63, 1962 SCR  (2) 694Author: R DayalBench: Dayal, RaghubarPETITIONER:
DELHI ADMINISTRATION

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
RAM SINGH

DATE OF JUDGMENT:
03/05/1961

BENCH:
DAYAL, RAGHUBAR
BENCH:
DAYAL, RAGHUBAR
SUBBARAO, K.
MUDHOLKAR, J.R.

CITATION:
 1962 AIR   63		  1962 SCR  (2) 694
 CITATOR INFO :
 D	    1968 SC   1	 (12)
 R	    1970 SC1396	 (5)


ACT:
Criminal  Law-lmmoral  traffic-Enactment  for	Suppression-
Special	  Police   officer   appointed	 under	 the	Act-
Investigation of offences under the Act-Exclusion of  powers
of  station-house officer--"Dealing with offences under	 the
Act"--Suppression of immoral Traffic in Women and Girls Act,
1956  (104  of 1956), SS. 2(1),	 8,13(2)--Code	of  Criminal
Procedure, 1898 (Act V of 1898), SS. 5, 156, 551.



HEADNOTE:
The  respondent was prosecuted for an offence underS. 8of
the  Suppression of Immoral Traffic in Women and Girls	Act,
1956, and a charge-sheet was presented before a First  Class
Magistrate in Delhi by a sub-inspector, who, as the  officer
in charge of the Police Station, had investigated the  case.
On  an	objection raised by the respondent,  the  Magistrate
quashed the charge-sheet on the ground that only the special
police	officer	 appointed under the Act  was  competent  to
investigate the offences under the Act.
Held,	(Mudholkar,   J.,  dissenting),	  that	 since	 the
Suppression of Immoral Traffic in Women and Girls Act, 1956,
created	 new  offences	and  prescribed	 the  procedure	 for
dealing	 with them, it was a complete code in itself and  to
that  extent  the provisions of the Act	 must  prevail	over
those  of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898; that as	 the
Act provided for the appointment of a special police officer
for  dealing with offences under the Act in the area  within
his jurisdiction, he and his assistant police officers	were
the  only persons who could investigate offences  under	 the
Act committed within that area, and that police officers not
specially appointed as special police officers could not
695
investigate the offences under the Act even though they were
cognizable offences.
per  Mudholkar, J.-A special police officer appointed  under
the Suppression of Immoral Traffic in Women and Girls Act,
1956,  and  empowered to deal with offences  under  the	 Act
underS. 13(1)derives the power to investigate  into	such
offences not from that section but only unders. 551. of the
Code  of Criminal Procedure.  Even assuming that  the  words
"deal  with  offences". ins. 13(1)confer  upon  a  special
police	officer	 the power to investigate  into	 an  offence
under  the Act and present a charge-sheet, the powers of  an
officer-in-charge   of	 a   station-house   within    whose
jurisdiction an offence under the Act has been committed are
not excluded by any of the provisions of the Act.



JUDGMENT:CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 220  of
1960.Appeal from the judgment, and order dated August 4, 1960, of
the  Punjab  "High Court, in Criminal Revision No.  31-D  of
1960.C.   K.	 Daphtary, Solicitor-General of India, R. H.  Dhebar
and D. Gupta, for the appellant.The respondent did not appear.1961.	May  3. The Judgment of K. Subba  Rao  and  Raghubar
Dayal,	JJ.,  was  delivered by Raghubar  Dayal,  J.  J.  R.
Mudholkar, J., delivered a separate judgment.
RAGHUBAR DAYAL, J.-The only point for consideration in	this
appeal,	 by  certificate  granted  by  the  High  Court	  of
Judicature  at Punjab, is whether a police officer,  who  is
neither	 a special police officer under the  Suppression  of
Immoral	 Traffic  in Women and Girls Act, 1956 (Act  CIV  of
1956),	hereinafter  called the Act, nor  a  police  officer
subordinate  to	 a  special  police  officer,  can   validly
investigate the offences under the Act.Ram Singh, respondent, was suspected of having committed  an
offence unders. 8of the Act.	Jet Ram, Sub-Inspector,	 who
had not been appointed a special police officer by the State
Government, investigated the case and submitted the  charge-
sheet to the Magistrate.  The Magistrate quashed the charge-
sheet,	holding	 that the special police officer  alone	 was
competent696to  investigate	 the case and that Jet Ram  could  not	have
investigated  it.  On revision by the State, the High  Court
agreed	with  the view of the Magistrate and  dismissed	 the
revision.   The High Court, however, granted  a	 certificate
underArt.  133(1)(c)of the Constitution  and	 hence	this
appeal by the Delhi Administration.The  learned  Solicitor-General,  appearing  for  the  Delhi
Administration,	 has  submitted that in the absence  of	 any
definite  provision  in	 the Act de-barring  the  police  to
exercise its powers with respect to cognizable offences, the
regular	  police  can  exercise	 those	powers	 and   that,
consequently there is nothing wrong in the Sub-Inspector  of
the  regular police making an investigation in a case  under
the Act.  He also submits that the special police officer is
not  competent	to investigate offences,  his  powers  being
confined  to  what may come within the	expression  'dealing
with offences under the Act', and which expression,  accord-
ing  to	 him, does not cover the power to  investigate	into
offences.It  is urged for the respondent that it is only the  special
police officer who is competent to investigate the  offences
under the Act.Before	 dealing  with	the  merits  of	 the  question	 for
determination,	we may set out the object of  the  enactment
and the relevant provisions thereof.The Actwas enacted in
pursuance of the International Convention signed at New York
on the 9th day of May, 1950, for the suppression of  immoral
traffic	  in  women  and  girls.Section  2deals	with
definitions and, according to its clause (1), special police
officer' means a police officer appointed by or on behalf of
the State Government to be in charge of police duties within
a specified area for the purposes of the Act.Sections 3to9create new offences and provide punishment for them.	  It
is not necessary to detail the nature of the offences.Section 10deals with release of convicted persons convicted
for  certain offences, on probation of good conduct, in	 the
manner	provided  in  sub-s. (1) ofs. 562of  the  Code  of
Criminal Procedure, hereinafter called697the  Code, or with admonition as provided in sub-s. (1A)  of
s. 562of the Code.  Certain provisions ofss. 562,563and564apply to such cases.The provisions ofs. 11of the Act correspond to those ofs.
565of the Code.Section	 12provides for taking security for good  behaviour
from  habitual offenders at the time of passing sentence  on
them  and thus correspond, in a way to the provisions ofs.
106of the Code.  The provisions ofss. 112to126of	 the
Code apply to such a case.Sections 13,14,15and16of the Act are as follows:
"13. (1) There shall be for each area to be specified by the
State  Government in this behalf, a special  police  officer
appointed  by  or on behalf of that Government	for  dealing
with offences under this Act in that area.(2)  The special police officer shall not be below the	rank
of-(a)  an	 Assistant Commissioner of Police in the  presidency
towns of Madras and Calcutta;(b)  a	Superintendent of Police in the presidency  town  of
Bombay; and(c)  a Deputy Superintendent of Police else where.
(3)  For  the  efficient  discharge  of	 his  functions	  in
relation to offences under this Act-(a)  the special police officer of an area shall be assisted
by  such  number of subordinate police	officers  (including
women  police  officers wherever practicable) as  the  State
Government may think fit; and(b)  the  State	 Government may associate with	the  special
police	officer a non-official advisory body  consisting  of
not  more than five leading social welfare workers  of	that
area  (including  women	 social	 welfare  workers   wherever
practicable)   to  advise  him	on  questions	of   general
importance regarding the working of this Act.14.  Notwithstanding  anything	contained  inthe  Codeof
Criminal Procedure' 1898 (5 of 1898) any offence  punishable
under this Act shall be deemed to698be a cognizable offence within the meaning of that Code:
 Provided  that, notwithstanding anything contained in	that
Code,-(i)  arrest without warrant may be made only by the  special
police	officer	 or  under his	direction  or  guidance,  or
subject to his prior approval;(ii) when  the special police officer requires	any  officer
subordinate to him to arrest without warrant otherwise	than
in his presence any person for an offence under this Act, he
shall  give  that subordinate officer an order	in  writing,
specifying  the	 person to be arrested and the	offence	 for
which  the  arrest  is being made; and	the  latter  officer
before	arresting  the	person	shall  inform  him  of	 the
substance  of  the  order and, on  being  required  by	such
person, show him the order;(iii)	  any police officer not below the rank of inspector
specially  authorized by the special police officer may,  if
he  has reason to believe that on account of delay  involved
in  obtaining the order of the special police  officer,	 any
valuable evidence relating to any offence under this Act  is
likely	to be destroyed or concealed, or the person who	 has
committed  or is suspected to have committed the offence  is
likely	to  escape,  or if the name and address	 of  such  a
person is unknown or there is reason to suspect that a false
name or address has been given, arrest the person  concerned
without	 such order, but in such a case be shall report,  as
soon as may be, to the special police officer the arrest and
the circumstances in which the arrest was made.15.  (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law
for  the  time being in force, whenever the  special  police
officer has reasonable grounds for believing that an offence
punishable under this Act has been or is being committed  in
respect of a woman or girl living in any premises, and	that
search	of the premises with warrant cannot be made  without
undue  delay, such officer may, after recording the  grounds
of  his	 belief, enter and search such	premises  without  a
warrant.(2)  Before making a search under sub-section (1),699the  special  police  officer shall call upon  two  or	more
respectable  inhabitants  (at least one of whom shall  be  a
woman) of the locality in which the place to be searched  is
situate, to attend and witness the search, and may issue any
order in writing to them or any of them so to do.
(3)  Any  person who, without reasonable cause,	 refuses  or
neglects to attend and witness a search under this  section,
when  called upon to do so by an order in writing  delivered
or  tendered  to him, shall be deemed to have  committed  an
offence	 undersection 187of the Indian Penal Code  (45  of
1860).(4)  The special police officer entering any premises  under
sub-section  (1) shall be entitled to remove  therefrom	 any
girl,  if in his opinion she is under the age of  twenty-one
years  and is carrying on or is being made to carry  on,  or
attempts are being made to make her carry on, prostitution.
(5)  The  special  police officer, after removing  the	girl
under sub-section (4) shall forthwith produce her before the
appropriate magistrate.	 (6) The special police officer	 and
other persons taking part in, or attending, and witnessing a
search	shall  not  be	liable	to  any	 civil	or  criminal
proceedings  against  them in respect of  anything  lawfully
done in connection with, or for the purpose of, the search.16.  (1)  Where	 a  magistrate has reason  to  believe	from
information received from the police or other. wise, that  a
girl  apparently  under	 the age of twenty.  one  years,  is
living,	 or  is carrying on, or is being made  to  carry  on
prostitution, in a brothel, he may direct the special police
officer to enter such brothel, and to remove therefrom	such
girl and produce her before him.(2)  The  special  police officer after	 removing  the	girl
shall  forthwith produce her before the	 Magistrate  issuing
the order."Section	 17provides  for  intermediate  custody  of  girls
removed unders. 15or rescued unders. 16.Sections  18to21provide for  matters  unconnected	with
offences.700Section	 22provides that no Court inferior to	 that  of  a
Magistrate  as	defined	 in cl. (c) ofs. 2shall  try	 the
offences   mentioned  in  the  section.	   The	 Magistrates
mentioned  in  this clause are	District  Magistrates,	Sub-
Divisional   Magistrates,   Presidency	Magistrates   or   a
Magistrate  of	the First Class specially empowered  by	 the
State Government by notification in the official gazette  to
exercise jurisdiction under the Act.It  is clear from the various provisions that the Act  is  a
complete  Code with respect to what is to be done under	 it.
It  deals with the suppression of immoral traffic  in  women
and   girls,  a	 matter	 which	has  to	 be   tackled	with
consideration,	 intelligence  and  understanding   of	 the
problem.  This is evident from the provisions of cl. (b)  of
sub-s. (3) ofs. 13which provides for the association of  a
non-official advisory body consisting of not more than	five
leading social welfare workers of that area (including women
social	welfare	 workers  wherever  practicable)  with	 the
special	 police officer in order to advise him on  questions
of general importance regarding the working of the Act.The Actcreates new offences, provides for the forum  before
which  they  would be tried and the orders to be  passed  on
conviction  of the offenders.  Necessary provisionsof	 the
Codeof Criminal Procedure have been adopted fully or	with
modifications.The Actprovides machinery to deal with	 the
offences created and its necessary implication must be	that
new machinery is. to deal with those offences in  accordance
with the provisions of the special Act and, when there is no
specific  provision  in	 such Act, in  accordance  with	 the
general	 procedure  and that no other machinery is  to	deal
with those offences.  It does not appear reasonable that the
investigation  of offences would have been  left  unprovided
and was to be done by the regular police, in accordance with
the regular procedure laid-down underthe Code.
On  the other hand, there are certain provisions  which	 are
such  that  the regular police cannot comply with  them	 and
thus  they  point to the conclusion that it is	the  special
police officer alone who is to take any701action	which the police has to take in connection with	 the
offences under the Act.Section 14makes offences under the
Act  cognizable,  which, according tothe  Codemeans	that
persons accused of those offences can be arrested without  a
warrant, ands. 157of the Code specially mentions that	 the
investigating officer, if necessary, is to take measures for
the  discovery and the arrest of the offender; and yet,	 the
power  to  arrest  without a warrant is	 not  given  to	 the
regular police, but under the proviso to this section, is to
be  exercised  by the special police officer  or  under	 his
direction or guidance or subject to his prior approval.	 The
provisions  of proviso (iii) correspond to the provision  of
s. 57of the Codeand others refer to special  circumstances
in which a police officer not below the rank of an inspector
specially  authorised  by  the special	police	officer	 can
arrest without warrant.Section	 15provides for searches without warrant,  by	 the
special police officer.	 This section does not	specifically
state  that  the special police	 officer  alone	 will,search
without warrant, but it is clear from the provisions of this
section	 that officers of the regular police force will	 not
search without warrant and thus will not exercise the  power
given unders. 165of the Code.	 All the provisions ofs. 15correspond to those ofs. 165of the Code.Further, in view of sub-s. (2) ofs. 15, the special  police
officer is required to include at least one woman among	 the
search witnesses.  There is no such restriction ins. 103of
the Code.  If a regular police officer is to conduct  search
in  pursuance  of the powers conferred unders. 165of	 the
Code,  he is not bound to include a woman among	 the  search
witnesses.  Further, sub-ss. (4) and (5) ofs. 15authorise
a  special  police officer to remove any girl found  in	 the
promises  searched, if she be under twenty-one years of	 age
and is carrying on prostitution.  Such a girl is to be	pro-
duced  before  the  appropriate	 Magistrate.   The  ordinary
regular police officer conducting search unders. 165of the
Code, will not be able to do anything with respect to such a
girl found in the premises89702searched by him.  These provisions clearly indicate that the
regular	 police officers are not to exercise any  powers  in
connection with the offences and the other purposes of	this
Act.The entire police duties in connection with the purposes  of
the Act within a certain area have been put in the charge of
a special police officer.  There must be a definite  purpose
behind	the  provision	of appointing a	 police	 officer  in
charge of the police duties within a specified area for	 the
purpose	 of  this  Act.	 If the	 ordinary  police  can	also
perform the police duties for the purposes of the Act, there
can  be no special reason for making the provision  for	 the
appointment  of	 a special police officer.   The  expression
'police duties' will include all the functions of the police
in connection with the purpose of the Act and in the special
context	 of  the Act they will include the  detection,	pre-
vention	 and investigation of offences and the other  duties
which have been specially imposed on them under the Act.
According  tos. 13of the Act, 'there shall be,  for	each
area  to  be specified by the State  Government,  a  special
police officer appointed by or on behalf of that  Government
for dealing with offences under the Act in that area'.	 The
expression  'dealing  with offences' is of wide	 import	 and
will  include  any  act	 which	the  police  has  to  do  in
connection  with  the  offences	 under	the  Act.   In	this
connection, we have been referred to the provisions ofs.  5of the Criminal Procedure Code, which reads:"All  offences  underthe	 Indian	 Penal	Codeshall  be investigated, inquired into,  tried,
	      and  otherwise  dealt with  according  to	 the
	      provisions hereinafter contained.
	      (2)   All	 offences under any other law  shall
	      be  investigated,	 inquired into,	 tried,	 and
	      otherwise	 dealt	with according to  the	same
	      provisions,  but subject to any enactment	 for
	      the time being in force regulating the  manner
	      or  place	 of investigating,  inquiring  into,
	      trying   or   otherwise  dealing	 with	such
	      offences."It is submitted that the expression 'dealt with' must703mean  something	 which	is not	included  in  investigation,
inquiry or trial.  This does not necessarily follow from the
provisions of this section.  The word ,otherwise' points  to
the   fact   that  the	expression  'dealt  with'   is	 all
comprehensive,	and  that investigation, inquiry  and  trial
were some aspects of 'dealing with' the offences.   Further,
according to sub-s. (3) ofs. 13, the special police officer
is  to	be  assisted, for the  efficient  discharge  of	 his
functions  in  relation	 to offences under this	 Act,  by  a
number of subordinate police officers and will be advised by
a non-official advisory body.  The expression 'functions  in
relation  to  offences' do include his	functions  connected
with the investigation of the offences.	 There is no  reason
to exclude such functions from the functions contemplated by
sub-s. (3).The suggestion that the special police officer would be very
heavily	 worked in case he had to perform all  the  ordinary
duties	of  the police connected with the  investigation  of
offences  in addition to the duties conferred on  him  under
the   Act,   does  not	go  far	 in  putting   a   different
interpretation on the powers of the special police  officer.
He  is to be assisted by his sub. ordinate police  officers.
They  can  investigate	both under the	implication  of	 the
provisions  of	s.  13, as they are to	assist	the  special
police	officer,  and  also on deputations  by	the  special
police officer, in view ofs. 157of the Code.Section 5Aof the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 (Act 11
of 1947) provides that notwithstanding anything contained inthe Codeof Criminal Procedure, no police officer below	 the
rank of officers mentioned in clauses (a), (b) and (c) shall
investigate  any of the offences mentioned in that  Section.
The  provision	was made in a prohibitive form	because	 the
police	officers  below	 the ranks  mentioned  were  not  to
exercise  their power of investigation unless  a  Magistrate
specially  ordered them to investigate.	 The  provision	 was
not  with  respect to conferring any special powers  on	 any
particular  officer.  It was just to restrict the powers  of
certain	 officers  with	 respect  to  investigating  certain
offences in certain circumstances.704The difference in the language ofs. 5Aof the Prevention of
Corruption  Act from that ofs. 13of the Act, is  therefore
of no help to the contention for the State.If the power of the special police officer to deal with	 the
offences  under the Act, and therefore to  investigate	into
the  offences, be not held exclusive, there can be then	 two
investigations carried on by two different agencies, one  by
the  special  police officer and the other by  the  ordinary
police.	  It is easy to imagine the difficulties which	such
duplication of proceedings can lead to.	 There is nothing in
the Act to co-ordinate the activities of the regular  police
with respect to cognizable offences under the Act and  those
of the special police officer.The special police officer is a police officer and is always
of  the rank higher than a Sub-Inspector and  therefore,  in
view  ofs. 551of the Code, can exercise the	same  powers
throughout the local area to which he is appointed as may be
exercised  by  the  officer in charge of  a  police  station
within the limits of his station.We are therefore of opinion that the special police  officer
is  competent to investigate and that he and  his  assistant
police	 officers   are	 the  only  persons   competent	  to
investigate offences under the Act and that police  officers
not  specially appointed as special police  officers  cannot
investigate the offences under the Act even though they	 are
cognizable offences.  The result is that this appeal by	 the
Delhi Administration fails and is hereby dismissed.
MUDHOLKAR,  J.-The point which arises for  consideration  in
this  appeal  is  whether  a  charge-sheet  presented  by  a
station-house	officer	 alleging  against  the	  respondent
certain offences under the Suppression of Immoral Traffic in
Women and Girls Act, 1956 (Act No. CIV of 1956) (hereinafter
called the Act) is bad because the investigation into  those
offences  was  carried out not by a special  police  officer
appointed under the Act but by the station house officer.
The respondent is alleged to be a pimp and said to705have  committed	 offences  unders. 8of  the  Act.   Inves-
tigation into the offences was made by the  officer-incharge
of  the Kamla Market Police Station and a  charge-sheet	 was
presented  by him before a First Class Magistrate in  Delhi.
Similar	 charge-sheets	were put up  against  certain  other
persons.   An objection was taken before the  Magistrate  in
all these cases that the charge-sheets were bad because	 the
investigation into the various offences was not made by	 the
special	 police	 officer  referred  to	in  the	 Act.	This
objection was upheld by the Magistrate and the charge-sheets
were rejected.	An application for revision was preferred by
the  Delhi Administration before the High Court	 of  Punjab.
But  that  application	was  also  rejected.  Thereupon	 the
Administration	sought	a certificate from  the	 High  Court
underArt.  134(1)(c)of the Constitution  which  the	High
Court  granted.	 That is how the present appeal came  to  be
preferred before this Court.The  High Court, following the decision in Kuppammal, In  re
(1) held that an offence under the Act must be	investigated
only  by one of the officers mentioned ins. 13and  that  a
charge-sheet based upon the investigation made by any  other
police officer is bad and must be quashed.In  my opinion the view taken by the Madras High  Court	 and
accepted  by  the Punjab High Court is untenable.The	 Actcreates	 certain  new offences, prescribes  the	 placing  of
certain	 restrictions  upon persons found  guilty  of  those
offences,  provides for the appointment of a special  police
officer	 and  for  the constitution of	an  Advisory  Board,
confers	 certain  special  powers upon	the  special  police
officer,  em.  powers Magistrates to order  the	 closure  of
brothels  and  eviction of the offenders from  the  premises
occupied  by them as well as for the removal of	 prostitutes
from   any  place  and	also  makes  a	provision  for	 the
establishment  of  protective homes as well  as	 em.  powers
Magistrates  to order detention of women and girls  in	such
protective  homes in certain circumstances.  In addition  it
provides for the making of rules.(1)  I.L.R. [1959] Mad. 345.706According  to my brother Raghubar Dayal, J., since  the	 Act
creates	 new  offences	and  prescribes	 the  procedure	 for
dealing with them it is a complete code in itself Therefore,
according  to him, to that extent the provisions of the	 Act
must  prevail over thoseof the Codeof Criminal  Procedure,
1898.  Further according to him, since the Act provides	 for
the appointment of a special police officer for dealing with
offences under this Act in the area within his jurisdiction,
it  is he and he alone who can investigate into	 an  offence
under the Act committed within that area.It would be convenient to refer to the provisions ofs.	  5of the Code of Criminal Procedure which runs thus:"(1) All offences underthe Indian Penal Codeshall  be investigated, inquired into,  tried,
	      and  otherwise  dealt with  according  to	 the
	      provisions hereinafter contained.
	      (2)   All	 offences under any other law  shall
	      be  investigated,	 inquired into,	 tried,	 and
	      otherwise	 dealt	with according to  the	same
	      provisions,  but subject to any enactment	 for
	      the time being in force regulating the  manner
	      or  place	 of investigating,  inquiring  into,
	      trying  or otherwise dealing with such  offen-
	      ces."Sub-section  (2)  would prima facie apply to  cases  arising
under the Suppression of Immoral Traffic in Women and  Girls
Act  except to the extent that its provisions are  abrogated
or  superseded	by  the aforesaid  Act.	  While	 sub-s.	 (1)
provides  that only an offence underthe Penal Codemust  be
investigated  in accordance with the provisionsof the	Codeof  Criminal  Procedure, sub-s. (2) provides  that  offences
under  any other law shall be investigated,  inquired  into,
tried  and otherwise dealt with according to the  provisionsof  the Codesubject to any enactment for the time being  in
force  "regulating  the manner or  place  of  investigating,
inquiring  into,  trying  or  otherwise	 dealing  with	such
offences." What has to be ascertained, therefore, is whether
in  the	 Act  in question there	 are  any  provisions  which
regulate  the  manner of carrying out  an  investigation  of
offences thereunder--because707here we are concerned only with the limited question of	 the
power  of  a station house officer to  investigate  into  an
offence under the Act.	A bare perusal of the Act would show
that  there is no provision therein which confers  upon	 the
special	 police	 officer appointed thereunder the  power  to
investigate  into  an offence made punishable  by  the	Act.
Such  power  is,  however, sought to  be  deduced  from	 the
provisions of sub-s. (1) ofs. 13which reads thus:"There shall be for each area to be  specified
	      by  the  State  Government in  this  behalf  a
	      special  police  officer appointed  by  or  on
	      behalf  of  that Government for  dealing	with
	      offences under this Act in that area."It  is	said that the words underlined are  wide  enough  to
include	 the power to investigate into offences.  These	 are
general words and are undoubtedly of wide import.  But	they
must  be construed in the light of the other  provisions  of
the  Act.The	 Actconfers  certain  specific	 powers	 and
imposes	 certain  specified  duties  on	 a  special   police
officer.   It  is to these matters that the  words  "dealing
with  offences" must be confined.  If it were the  intention
of  the legislature to confer upon a special police  officer
the sole power to investigate into an offence under the	 Act
it  would have enacted a provision similar tos. 5Ain	 thePrevention  of Corruption Act, 1947 (2 of 1947).This	 Actwas  before  the  Parliament  when it  enacted	the  Act  in
question  and  it  would be reasonable to  presume  that  if
Parliament  intended to confer similar power upon a  special
police	officer appointed under this Act it would have	used
the same language for expressing its will as it did ins. 5Aof the Prevention of Corruption Act.Offences  under the Act have been made cognizable bys.  14thereof.   Therefore, prima facies. 156(1)of the  Code  of
Criminal Procedure would apply and an officer-in-charge of a
police station would have the power to investigate into such
an offence.  No doubt, by virtue of the provisions of sub-s.
(2)  ofs.  5of  the	 Code  of  Criminal  Procedure,	 the
provisions  of	s.  156,Criminal Procedure  Codewould  be
subject	 to  those provisions of the Act which bear  on	 the
question of708investigation  into offences.  Had Parliament  desired	that
the  provisions ofs. 156of the Code of Criminal  Procedure
should not apply to offences under the Act it would, in view
of  the	 provisions  of sub-s. (2) ofs. 5of  the  Code  of
Criminal Procedure, have been careful enough to make express
provisions in the Act regulating the manner of investigation
of  offences thereunder and specifying the officer  entitled
to make the investigation so as to exclude a police  officer
entitled underthe Codeof Criminal Procedure to investigate
into  offences.	 In my judgment it would not have  left	 the
matter	to mere conjecture and rested content by  using	 the
expression "dealing with offences under this Act", which  on
its  face  is inadequate for excluding the operation  ofs.
166, Code of Criminal Procedure.Investigation,	inquiry and trial of offences  are  definite
stages	in  the process of bringing a  delinquent  to  book.
Each  stage is distinct from the other and  the	 legislature
has  made  it quite clear ins. 5of the  Code	of  Criminal
Procedure  itself  that	 they are  important  enough  to  be
mentioned specifically.	 To make the point clearer it  would
be  useful to compare the provisions of sub-s. (1) ofs.  13of the Act with those of sub-ss. (1) and (2) ofs. 5of	 the
Code of Criminal Procedure.  While in the former, Parliament
has  merely used the words "dealing with offences under	 the
Act"  in the latter the words used are	"investigating,	 in-
quiring	  into,	 trying	 or  otherwise	dealing	 with	such
offences."  No doubt the expression "dealing with  offences"
would,	according to its ordinary connotation,	include	 the
stages	of  investigation,  inquiry  and  trial.   But	 the
legislature has specifically referred to the aforesaid three
stages	because	 of  their  importance	and  apparently	 for
obviating  any doubt as to its intention.   When  Parliament
had  before  itthe  Codeof	Criminal  Procedure  and  in
particular  the	 provisions ofs. 5ands.  156thereof  it
would  have used in sub-s. (1) ofs. 13of the Act  language
similar	 to  that used by it in sub& (2) ofs.	5,Criminal
Procedure Codeif it were its intention to include in sub-s.
(1)  ofs. 13matters like investigation, inquiry and  trial
or any of709them.  It would, therefore, be legitimate to infer that when
Parliament  spoke  ins. 13(1)of a special  police  officer
being  empowered to deal with offences under the Act it	 did
not intend to confer upon him the power to investigate	into
an offence under the Act.It was pointed out to us that a special police officer shall
not be below the rank of an Assistant Commissioner of Police
in the towns of Madras and Calcutta and a Superintendent  of
Police	in.  the  Presidency Town of  Bombay  and  a  Deputy
Superintendent	of  Police elsewhere  and,  therefore,	such
police	officer would have the power to investigate into  an
offence.   That,  however,  would be not  by  force  of	 the
provisions of sub-s. (1) ofs. 13of the Act but by that  of
the provisions ofs. 551of the Code of Criminal  Procedure,
which runs thus:"Police-officers	 superior  in  rank  to	  an
	      officer-incharge	 of  a	police-station	 may
	      exercise the same powers, throughout the local
	      area  to which they are appointed, as  may  be
	      exercised by such officer within the limits of
	      his station."I would like to make it clear that it is not my view that  a
special	 police officer appointed under the Act cannot	have
the  power to investigate into an offence under the Act	 but
what I hold is that he does not derive such power from	sub-
s. (1) ofs. 13of the Act.  It is only unders. 551of	 the
Code  of Criminal Procedure that he may be able to  exercise
the power to investigate into an offence under the Act.
It was said by reference to the definition of special police
officer ins. 2(1)of the Act that since such an officer  is
to  be in charge of "police duties" within a specified	area
he would have the power to investigate into an offence.	 The
expression  "police duties" is not defined anywhere  in	 the
Act.   But  we were referred tos. 23of the Police  Act  in
this  connection.   The relevant part of that  section	runs
thus:"It shall be the duty of every  police-officer
	      promptly	to obey and execute all	 orders	 and
	      warrants	 lawfully  issued  to  him  by	 any
	      competent	   authority;	to    collect	 and
	      communicate intelligence affecting the90710public  peace;  to prevent the  commission  of
	      offences	and public nuisances; to detect	 and
	      bring offenders to justice........"The  suggestion	 is  that the words  "to  detect  and  bring
offenders  to justice" are comprehensive enough	 to  include
the power to investigate.  It is sufficient to say that	 the
duties enjoined upon police officers bys. 23are  something
quite  apart from those which are enjoined upon them bythe
Codeof  Criminal  Procedure.	The  investigation  into  an
offence is a matter of some importance.	 Statements recorded
therein have considerable value and can be used for  contra.
dieting	 witnesses questioned during investigation.   It  is
for   this  reason  that  detailed  provisions	 have	been
incorporated inthe Codeof Criminal Procedure dealing	with
this subject.  It is only when an investigation is completed
that  a	 police officer is empowered to	 present  a  charge-
sheet.	 Neither  the  Police Act  nor	the  Suppression  of
Immoral	 Traffic  in  Women  and  Girls	 Act  contains	 any
provision  whatsoever  with  regard  to	 the  making  of  an
investigation or presentation of a charge-sheet.  It  would,
therefore,  not	 be appropriate to read in the	words  "deal
with  offences"	 the  power to	investigate  into  them	 and
present a charge-sheet.The High Court of Punjab as well as the High Court of Madras
have  held not only thats. 13(1)of the Act  confers  power
upon  special police officer to investigate into an  offence
under the Act but that the power conferred is exclusive.   I
am  unable  to appreciate how even assuming that  the  words
"deal  with offences" confer upon a special  police  officer
the  power to investigate into an offence under the Act	 and
present	 a charge-sheet, the powers of an  officer-in-charge
of  a  station-house within whose  jurisdiction	 an  offence
under the Act has been committed are excluded.	There is not
a  whisper  ins. 13(1)of the Act of the exclusion  of	 the
powers	of an officer-in-charge of a police station.  It  is
suggested that unless it is so held a confusion will  result
because	  the  special	police	officer	 as  well   as	 the
officer-in-charge of a police station will711each exercise his power to investigate into an offence under
the Act.I  do  not  think  that there would  be	 a  danger  of	such
simultaneous  exercise	of the power to investigate  by	 two
officers.   The	 offence will have to be registered  at	 the
police	station	 within the limits of  the  jurisdiction  of
which  the offence has taken place.  Thereafter it would  be
investigated  into by the officer at whose instance  it	 was
registered.   If that officer happens to be a  station-house
officer	 the  special  police  officer	may  take  out	 the
investigation  from his hands or allow him to  continue	 it.
If the offence is registered at the instance of the  special
police officer, the station-house officer would be bound  to
know of it from the station-house records and would stay his
hands.Upon  this  view, therefore, I would allow the	appeal,	 set
aside  the judgment of the High Court and of the  Magistrate
and  remit  the	 case to the latter  for  being	 dealt	with
according to law.By  COURT: In accordance with the opinion of  the  majority,
this appeal is dismissed.Appeal dismissed.