Take notes as you read a judgment using ourVirtual Legal Assistantand get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out ourPremium Memberservices --Free for one month.Supreme Court of IndiaGovernor General In Council vs Musaddi Lal on 31 January, 1961Equivalent citations: 1961 AIR  725, 1961 SCR  (3) 647Author: S C.Bench: Shah, J.C.PETITIONER:
GOVERNOR GENERAL IN COUNCIL

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
MUSADDI LAL.

DATE OF JUDGMENT:
31/01/1961

BENCH:
SHAH, J.C.
BENCH:
SHAH, J.C.
KAPUR, J.L.

CITATION:
 1961 AIR  725		  1961 SCR  (3) 647
 CITATOR INFO :
 RF	    1962 SC1879	 (7)
 R	    1965 SC1755	 (5)
 R	    1969 SC  23	 (9)
 E&D	    1974 SC 923	 (51)


ACT:
Railway---Non-delivery	of goods--Suit for compensation	 for
non-delivery,  if  distinct  from  compensation	 for   loss,
destruction'   or   deterioration--Notice   of	 claim	 for
compensation,  if condition precedent--Limitation from	when
to  run--Indian Railways Act, 189o (IX of 1890),ss. 72and77--Indian Limitation Act, 1908, Arts. 30, 31.



HEADNOTE:
The  respondent	 served	 on  the  Railway  Administration  a
composite notice under s- 77 of theIndian Railways Actand
under  s.  So of the Code of Civil Procedure  and  sued	 for
price of goods and for loss on account of nondelivery.	 The
claim  was resisted by the Railway Administration  on  pleas
amongst others that the suit was not maintainable without an
effective notice underS. 77of the Railway Act and that the
suit  was barred because at the date of the suit the  period
of limitation prescribed byArt. 31of theIndian Limitation
Acthad expired.
A  full bench of the Allahabad High Court upheld the  decree
of the trial court in favour of the respondent holding	that
a  claim  for compensation for non-delivery of goods  was  a
claim  distinct	 from the claim for compensation  for  loss,
destruction  or	 deterioration	of the	goods,	and  to	 the
enforcement of a claim of the former variety by action in  a
court of law underS. 77was not a condition precedent.
Held,  thats.	 77of the Indian  Railways  Act  imposes  a
restriction  on the enforcement of liability declared byS.
72of the Act and prescribes a condition precedent  to	 the
maintainability of a claim for compensation for goods  lost,
destroyed  or  deteriorated  while in  the  custody  of	 the
railway	 Administration who are bailers and not	 insurer  of
goods.	 The  section is enacted with a view to	 enable	 the
railway administration to make enquiries and if possible  to
recover	 the goods and deliver them to the consignee and  to
prevent stale claims.  Failure to deliver goods is the	con-
sequence of loss or destruction and the cause of action	 for
it  is	not distinct from the cause of action  for  loss  or
destruction,
83
648
Held,  further, that merely because Arts. 30 and 3r  of	 theIndian	Limitation  Actprescribe different points  of	time
from  which  the  limitation is to  run	 for  suits  against
carriers  it  cannot be inferred that the claim	 covered  by
either article is not for compensation for loss, destruction
or deterioration of the goods; and the said Arts. 30 and  31
cannot	be  projected  uponss. 72and77of	 the  Indian
Railways Act for holding that suit for compensation for non-
delivery of goods does not fall withins. 77.The  Madras  and  Southern  Mahratta  Railway  Co.  Ltd.  v.
Haridoss  Banmalidoss,	(1918)	I.L.R.	41  Mad.  871,Hill
Sawyers and Co. v. Secretary of State,, (1921) I.L.R. 2 Lah.
133,Martab Ali v. Union of India, [1954] 56 Bom.  L.R. 150,
Union  of India v. Mitayagiri Pullappa, I.L.R.	[1958]	A.P.
323, Assam Bengal Railway Co. Ltd. v. Radhika Mohan Nath and
Others, A.I.R. (1923) Cal. 397 and Bengal Nagpur Railway Co.
Ltd. v. Hamir Mull Chhagan Mull and Another (1926) I.L.R.  5
Pat.  106, approved. Governor-General inCouncil and  Others
v. Mahabir Ram and Another, (1953) I.L.R. I All. 64 and Jais
Ram Ramrekha Das V. G.I.P. Railway and Another (1929) I.L.R.
8 Pat. 545, overruled.



JUDGMENT:CIVIL  APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal  No.  313/1956.
Appeal	from the judgment and decree dated July 25,1952,  of
the Allahabad High Court in Second Appeal No. 2547 of 1946.
B.   Ganapathy Iyer and T. M. Sen for the appellant
K.   P. Gupta, for the respondent.1961.  January 31.  The Judgment of the Court was  delivered
by
SHAH, J.-On January 30, 1943, Bhola Nath Sambhu Ram as agent
of the respondent L. Musaddilal delivered a bale of cloth to
the  railway  administration  E. 1.  Rly.  at  Agra  railway
station for carriage by railway to the Chola Station in	 the
E.  I.	Rly.  The consignment was accepted  by	the  railway
administration and a railway receipt was issued in the	name
of  the consignor Bhola Nath Sambhu Ram.  Bhola Nath  Sambhu
Ram endorsed the railway receipt in favour of the respondent
and  sent it by post to the respondent.	 The bale  of  cloth
did  not  reach Chola, and the	railway	 administration	 was
unable	 despite   efforts   to	  trace	  it.	 There	 was
correspondence	between the railway administration  and	 the
respondent   about  the	 consignment.	Failing	 to   obtain
satisfaction649for  the  loss	suffered by him,  the  respondent  served  a
composite notice unders. 77of the Indian Railways Act	 and
s.  80 of the Civil Procedure Code on December 7, 1943,	 and
thereafter  on May 18, 1944, filed suit No. 283 of  1944  in
the  court of the 11 Munsif, Bulandshahr, for a	 decree	 for
Rs.  782-3-6 being the " price of the bale " and Rs.  200  "
for   loss   on	 account  of   nondelivery."   The   railway
administration resisted the claim on the pleas among  others
that  the  suit was not maintainable  without  an  effective
notice under a. 77 of theRailways Actand that the suit was
barred	because at the date of the institution of the  suit,
the  period  of	 limitation prescribed byArt.	 31of	 theLimitation  Acthad expired.  The trial court	decreed	 the
suit.	In appeal, the Additional Civil Judge,	Bulandshahr,
reversed, the decree passed by the trial court and dismissed
the  suit.   A	Full Bench of the High	Court  of  Allahabad
reversed the decree passed by the first appellate court	 and
restored the decree of the trial court.	 With certificate of
fitness	 underArt.  133(1)(c)of  the	 Constitution,	this
appeal has been preferred by the Union of India.Section	 77of the Railways Act in so far as it is  material
provides:"A   person   shall   not	  be   entitled	  to
	      compensation  for	 the  loss,  destruction  or
	      deterioration   of  goods	 delivered   to	  be
	      carried, unless his claim to compensation	 has
	      been  preferred  in writing by him or  on	 his
	      behalf  to the railway  administration  within
	      six  months from the date of the	delivery  of
	      the goods for carriage by railway."Section	 77manifestly prescribes a condition  precedent  to
the  maintainability of a claim for compensation  for  goods
lost, destroyed or deteriorated while in the custody of	 the
railway	 administration.   The	notice	prescribed  was	 not
served	by  the respondent upon the  railway  administration
within	six  months from the date on which  the	 goods	were
delivered  for carriage, and prima facie the suit  would  be
barred	 for   non-compliance  of  a   statutory   condition
precedent.   But  the respondent pleaded and  the  plea	 has
found favour with the High Court that the suit filed by him650was  for  compensation	not for	 loss,	destruction  or	  it
deterioration  of the goods, but " for non-delivery  of	 the
goods."	 In  the  view	of  the	 High  Court,  a  claim	 for
compensation  for non-delivery of goods is a claim  distinct
from  a	 claim	for compensation for  loss,  destruction  or
deterioration of goods and to the enforcement of a claim  of
the former variety by action in a court of laws. 77is	 not
a condition precedent.The  railway  administration in India is not an	 insurer  of
goods:	it is merely a bailee of goods entrusted to  it	 for
carriage.Section 72of the Railways Act,  prescribes	 the
measure	  of  the  general  responsibility  of	 a   railway
administration as a carrier of goods.  By that section,	 the
responsibility	 of  a	railway	 administration	 for   loss,
destruction  or	 deterioration	of  goods  delivered  to  be
carried by railway is subject to other provisions of the Act
to be that of a bailee unders. 152ands. 161of the Indian
Contract  Act,	1872.Sections 151and152of	 the  Indian
Contract Act deal with the duties of a bailee.	If a  bailee
takes as much care of the goods bailed to him as a person of
ordinary  prudence would under similar circumstances of	 his
own  goods of the same bulk, quality and value as the  goods
bailed	to him, in the absence of a special contract, he  is
not  responsible for loss, destruction or  deterioration  of
the goods bailed.  Byss. 160and161of the Indian Contract
Act, the bailee is under an obligation to return or  deliver
according to the bailor's direction the goods bailed as soon
as  the time for which the good were bailed has	 expired  or
the  purpose  for  which  the goods  were  bailed  has	been
accomplished and if on account of default of the bailee	 the
goods are not returned, delivered or tendered at the  proper
time,  he  is  responsible  to	the  bailor  for  any  loss,
destruction  or	 deterioration	of the	goods,	The  railway
administration	being  a bailee of the goods  delivered	 for
carriage to it is therefore a bailee during the period	when
the  goods remain in its custody for the purpose and in	 the
course of carriage and for the purpose of delivery after the
goods are carried to the destination.651But the quantum of care which the railway administration  is
required  to  take is that care which it would	take  having
regard	to  the bulk, quality and value of its	own  similar
goods.Section	 77of the Railways Act is enacted with a  view  to
enable	the railway administration to make enquiries and  if
possible  to  recover the goods and to deliver them  to	 the
consignee  and	to  prevent  stale  claims.   It  imposes  a
restriction  on the enforcement of liability declared by  s.72.    The  liability  declared	 by  a.	 72  is	 for   loss,
destruction  or	 deterioration.	 Failure to deliver  is	 the
consequence  of	 loss or destruction of goods; it  does	 not
furnish	 a cause of action on which a suit may, lie  against
the railway administration, distinct from a cause of  action
for  loss  or destruction.  By the use	of  the	 expression,
"loss,	destruction or deterioration," what is	contemplated
is loss or destruction or deterioration of the goods and the
consequent  loss  to  the  owner  tbereof.   If	 because  of
negligence or inadvertence or even wrongful act on the	part
of  the	 employees  of	the  railway  administration,  goods
entrusted for carriage are lost, destroyed or  deteriorated,
the railway administration is guilty of failing to take	 the
degree of care which is prescribed bys. 72of the  Railways
Act.There are undoubtedly two distinct articles, Arts. 30 and 31
in  the first schedule of theIndian Limitation Actdealing
with limitation for suits for compensation against carriers.Article	 30prescribes the period of limitation  for  suits
against a carrier for compensation against loss or injury to
goods  andArt. 31prescribes the period of  limitation	 for
suits for compensation against a carrier for non-delivery or
delay  in  delivering the goods.  The period  of  limitation
under  each of these articles is one year but the points  of
time from which that period is to be reckoned are different.
But  because  theIndian Limitation Actprovides  different
points	of  time from which the period of limitation  is  to
run,  it is not possible to infer that the claim covered  by
either article is not for compensation for loss, destruction
or deterioration of the goods.	We are unable to project the
provisions of Art, 30 and 31652of theLimitation Actuponss. 72and77of the Railways Act
and to hold that a suit for compensation for loss because of
non-delivery of goods does not fall withins. 77.  The	view
we  have  expressed  is	 supported  by	a  large  volume  of
authority in the courts in India for instanceThe Madras and
Southern Mahratta Railway Co., Ltd. v. Haridoss	 Banmalidoss(1),Hill Sawyers and Co. v. Secretary of State(2),Martab
Ali  v.	 Union of India(s), Union of  India  v.  Mitayagiri
Pullappa  (4),	Assam Bengal Railway Co.,  Ltd.	 v.  Radhika
Mohan  Nath (5) and Bengal Nagpur Railway Co. Ltd. v.  Hamir
Mull Chhagan Mull (6).The  view  expressed to the contrary in the  Allahabad	High
Court in Governor-General inCouncil v. Mahabir Ram(7)	 and
;by  the Patna High Court in Jais Ram Ramrekha Das v. G.  1.
P. Railway (8), is in our judgment erroneous.
This  appeal will therefore be allowed and the	respondent's
suit  will  stand  dismissed.  As the  Union  of  India	 was
permitted to appeal for obtaining the decision of this Court
which  may  settle  the conflict of views  even	 though	 the
amount	involved  is  small, we think that it  is  just	 and
proper that there should be no order as to costs throughout.
Appeal allowed.