Take notes as you read a judgment using ourVirtual Legal Assistantand get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out ourPremium Memberservices --Free for one month.Supreme Court of IndiaIndian Carbon Ltd vs Superintendent Of Taxes, Gauhati ... on 18 August, 1971Equivalent citations: 1972 AIR  154, 1972 SCR  (1) 316Author: A GroverBench: Grover, A.N.PETITIONER:
INDIAN CARBON LTD.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
SUPERINTENDENT OF TAXES, GAUHATI & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT18/08/1971

BENCH:
GROVER, A.N.
BENCH:
GROVER, A.N.
HEGDE, K.S.

CITATION:
 1972 AIR  154		  1972 SCR  (1) 316
 1971 SCC  (3) 612


ACT:
Assam  Sales Tax Act, 1947, Sch. 3 as attended byAssam	 Act14  of 1964-Central Sales Tax Act, 1956,ss. 14(1)and15-Petroleum coke, if 'declared goods'.



HEADNOTE:
The  appellant	was  carrying on the business  of  sale	 and
purchase of ,petroleum coke.By the Amending Act(Assam) 14
of  1964 sales-tax wits leviable. on the sale  of  petroleum
coke,  under the Assam Sales Tax Act, 1947.Under  the	 Actthe rate chargeable was 5%.  The appellant however contended
that  unders. 14of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956,  coal,
including  coke in all its forms, was one of  the  'declared
goods'	and  that unders. 15as it stood  at  the  relevant
time. the tax leviable could not exceed 2%.  The High  Court
held against the assessee on the ground that the word 'coke'
implied, only coke obtained from coal.
Allowing the appeal to this Court,
HELD  : Parliament used the word 'coke' ins. 14(1)of	 the
Central	 Act in its ordinary dictionary meaning which  would
cover petroleum coke. [319 E]
Since  the clause mentions that coal shall include  coke  in
all  its  forms,  the object was to extend  the	 meaning  of
'coal'	to include petroleum coke which is one of the  forms
of coke. [318 G-H; 3 19 F]



JUDGMENT:CIVIL  APPELLATE  JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal  No.  1612  of
1968.Appeal	from the judgment and order dated February 16,	1968
of   the Assam and Nagaland High Court in Civil Rule No.  28
of 1966.C.   K.	 Daphtary,  M. C. Chagla, J. B.	 Dadachanji,  P.  D.
Himatsingka,  B.  P. Maheshwari and I. N.  Shroff,  for	 the
appellant.Naunit Lal and Swaranjt Sodhi, for the respondents.
The Judgement of the Court was delivered by
Grover, J. This is an appeal by certificate from a  judgment
of the Assam and Nagaland High Court.The appellant is a company incorporatedunder   theIndia
Companies Act1956 in the State of Assam.It started  its
business on November 17, 1962 for the first time.Its
business includes sale and purchase of petroleum coke.Until
September 1, 1964 no sales tax was levied or was payable  by
the  company  on  the  sale of	petroleum  coke	 because  in
Schedule  3  of the Assam Sales Tax  Act  1947,	 hereinafter
called the 'Assam Act', which ,enumerated the goods on which
tax was not payable, Entry 7317read  "coal, coke and coalgas".By Amending Act14 of	1964
the said Entry was deleted from Schedule 3 to theAssam	 Actwith  effect from September 1, 1964.  By means of- a  letter
dated  July  7,	 1964 the Superintendent  of  Taxes,  Assam,
informed  the company that the petroleum coke and  gas	were
taxable	 at the rate of 5 Np in a rupee under theAssam	 Actand  directed the company to submit the return for  all	 the
periods	 prior	to  September 1, 1964  and  also  apply	 for
registration  under theAssam Actfor the sale of  petroleum
coke  within  the State of Assam.  The company	preferred  a
petition  for  revision	 underS. 31(2)of  the  Assam	 Act
challenging the order of the Superintendent of Taxes.	This
petition  was  dismissed  by the Commissioner  of  Taxes  on
September 8, 1965.  During the pendency of the said revision
petition  the  Superintendent of Taxes by his  letter  dated
August	14,  1965 modified his earlier order to	 the  extent
that  the demand was confined to the sale of petroleum	coke
subsequent to September 1, 1964.  The company then moved the
High  Court  underArt. 226of the  Constitution  which	 was
dismissed.In  the	 writ  petition as also the return  filed  in  reply
thereto and before the High Court the provisions of  certain
other  enactments  were	 mentioned.  These  were  the  Assam
Finance Sales Tax Act 1956 as amended from time to time	 and
the Assam (Sales of Petroleum and Petroleum Products...... )
Act  1956 as amended.  It is unnecessary to refer  to  their
relevant  provisions because before us it is  common  ground
that the tax would be payable under theAssam Act, the	only
question being about the rate.Under the Assam Actthe rate
chargeable  was 5 paise per rupee.  But it has been  claimed
on behalf of the appellant that by virtue of the  provisions
of  theCentral Sales Tax Act1956, hereinafter- called	 the
"Central Act", the rate at which the tax would be payable is
2 paise per rupee.Section 14declares, inter alia, that coal including coke in
all  its  forms	 constitutes  goods  which  are	 of  special
importance in inter-State trade or commerce.Section 15(1
) of theCentral Actas it stood at the relevant time was in
the following terms :-S.15 "Every sales tax law of a State shall, in so far  as
it imposes or authorises the imposition of a tax on the sale
or  purchase of declared goods, be subject to the  following
restrictions and conditions, namely(a)   the	 tax  payable  under  that  law	  in
	      respect of any sale or purchase of such. goods
	      inside  the  State shall not exceed  (two	 per
	      cent)  of the sale or purchase price  thereof,
	      and  such tax shall not be levied at mom	than
			    one stage.2-1340Sup.CI/71318(b)......................It may be mentioned that byAmending Act13 of
	      1966  3%	was substituted for 2%	with  effect
	      from July 1, 1966.It  is	not disputed that if petroleum coke  is	 covered  by
clause (i) ofs. 14which reads "coal including coke in	 all
its forms" the State was not competent to levy tax at a rate
exceeding  the	one given ins. 15(a) of theCentral	Act.
Before	the High Court it was common ground  that  petroleum
coke   is  used	 mainly	 in  industries	 dealing  with	 the
manufacture  of carbon products and it differs	in  material
constituents,  quality,	 utility and  composition  from	 the
ordinary  coke	used  as fuel.	It is used  largely  in	 the
manufacture  of	 dry cells, carbon electrodes  and  electric
furnace	 resistance elements.  Reference has also been	made
in  the judgment to what is stated in  'Chemical  Engineers'
Handbook', 3rd Edn., at page 1566
	      "Coke    is   a	hard,	 dense,	   infusible
	      carbonization residue that ranges from a	dull
	      gray-black  to a silvery grey; the  latter  is
	      characteristic	of   good   quality,	high
	      temperature coke.	 A coke of this type makes a
	      ringing  sound when dropped or struck  with  a
	      hard  object.  It exhibits a  porous  cellular
	      structure,  which primarily depends  upon	 the
	      kind  of	coal used and the  rate	 of  heating
	      during the carbonization process."The High Court was of the view that the word 'coal' includes
coke in all its forms in clause (i) ofs. 14of the  Central
Act  and must be taken to mean coke derived from  coal.	  In
other  words  it  must be coke which  had  been	 derived  or
acquired from coal by following the usual process of heating
or  burning.  The contention,, therefore, of  the  appellant
was  negatived	that  petroleum	 coke  was  covered  by	 the
aforesaid provision of theCentral Act.
We are wholly unable to agree with the reasoning or the con-
clusion of the High Court with regard to the ambit and scope
of clause (i) ofs. 14of the Central Act.  The language  is
clearly wide and coal has been stated to include coke in all
its  forms.  It is not denied that petroleum coke is one  of
the  forms  of coke.  Therefore on a plain  reading  of	 the
aforesaid  clause it is incomprehensible how petroleum	coke
can  be excluded from its ambit.  It may be that the  clause
mentions coal only and then declares that word shall include
coke  in all its forms.	 That shows that the object  of	 the
words  which follow coal is to extend its meaning.   In	 the
writ  petition	it was stated in para 2 that "coke  is	the;
refuse left after destructive distillation of coal, shale or
oil  and  is called Petroleum coke,  Metalluraical  coke  or
pitch coke,319to  indicate  its  source  or  origin;	but  all  these	 are
carbonacious  material used for the same purpose and  having
same properties, more or less, main being-mixed Carbon,-Volatile Matters, -Ash and-Moisture."
In  the	 affidavit  in	opposition that	 was  filed  by	 the
Assistant Commissioner of Taxes, Assam, this statement	does
not appear to have been properly denied.  All that has	been
stated in para 5 is that the word "coke" in clause (1) ofs.
14implies coke obtained from coal only and does not include
petroleum coke.	 The statement in the writ petition is	very
simila to the meaning of the word " coke" given in Webster's
New International Dictionary; Vol.  I which is as follows
	      "The  infusible,	cellular,  coherent  residue
	      obtained when coal is subjected to destructive- distillation.  It consists mainly of carbon,
	      is   hard,  porous,  and	gray,  and   has   a
	      submetallic  luster.   Any  similar  substance
	      left  as a residue when petroleum, shale	oil,
	      etc. are distilled to dryness."Our  attention has been invited by learned counsel  for	 the
State to the discussion in Encyclopaedia Britannica, Vol.  5
on  coke, coking and high temperature carbonization.  We  do
not  consider that when the Parliament used the word  "coke"
ins. 14(i)of the Central Act it had any intention to	give
it  a  meaning other than the  ordinary	 dictionary  meaning
which would cover petroleum coke.  At any rate, the language
employed  is  so  wide viz.  "Coke in all  its	forms"	that
petroleum  coke which is a form of coke cannot	possibly  be
excluded merely by reference to the word 'Coal'.
For  the reasons given above the appeal is allowed  and	 the
Judgment of the High Court is set aside.  The writ  petition
shall  stand allowed only to the extent that the State	will
be entitled -to, levy tax under theAssam Actnot  exceeding
the rate given in cl. (a) ofs. 15of the Central Act.	 The
appellant shall be entitled   to its costs in this Court.V.P.S.						      Appeal
allowed.320