Take notes as you read a judgment using ourVirtual Legal Assistantand get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out ourPremium Memberservices --Free for one month.Supreme Court of IndiaNandeshwar Prasad And Another vs The State Of U. P. And Others on 26 April, 1963Equivalent citations: 1964 AIR 1217, 1964 SCR  (3) 425Author: K WanchooBench: Wanchoo, K.N.PETITIONER:
NANDESHWAR PRASAD AND ANOTHER

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
THE STATE OF U. P. AND OTHERS

DATE OF JUDGMENT:
26/04/1963

BENCH:
WANCHOO, K.N.
BENCH:
WANCHOO, K.N.
GAJENDRAGADKAR, P.B.
GUPTA, K.C. DAS

CITATION:
 1964 AIR 1217		  1964 SCR  (3) 425
 CITATOR INFO :
 R	    1965 SC1017	 (9)
 F	    1965 SC1763	 (4,5)
 F	    1973 SC 689	 (20)
 R	    1973 SC1150	 (7)


ACT:
     Land Acquisition-Notification by Governor-Land required
for construction of industrial tenements-Second notification
-Collector    directed	 to   take    possession-Collector's
notification   stating	possession  would  be  taken   over-
Acquisition  for Kanpur Development Board-Action if must  be
taken under s. 114 of the Kanpur Act-Noitification under  s.
6  could be issued without first taking action under s.	 5A-
Land  acquisition  Act, 1894(1 of 1894),  ss.  4,5,5A,	6,9,
17(1), 17(4), Kanpur Urban Area Development Act, 1945(Act VI
of 1945), ss. 71,114.



HEADNOTE:
In these two appeals the same questions of law arise and the
facts  in C.A. No. 166 of 1962 are similar to those in	C.A.
167 of 1962 which are stated below.
     The  appellant in C.A. No. 167 of 1962 is the owner  of
certain	 lands situated in the city of Kanpur.	The land  is
occupied  by a Mill and godowns and no part of the  land  is
waste  land  or arable land.  In 1932 the U.  P.  Government
sanctioned by a notification a Scheme (Scheme No. XX) of the
improvement Trust, Kanpur.  This Trust has been replaced  by
the Development Board, Kanpur, by reason of the Kanpur Urban
Area Development Act, 1945.
426
     In	 1955  the Housing Department of the  Government  of
U.P, sponsored a scheme -for building industrial  tenements.
Part of the scheme concerned the locality in which the	land
in  dispute is situated.  In 1956 a notification was  issued
unders.  4of  the Land Acquisition	Act,  1894,  by	 the
Governor  of  U.P. to the effect that the plots	 in  dispute
were  required for the construction of tenements tinder	 the
subsidized industrial.housing scheme of the U.P.  Government
as well as for general improvement and street scheme No.  XX
of the Board.  This was followed by a notification unders.
6of the Land Acquisition Act stating that the	 case  being
one  of urgency the Governor was pleased under	sub-ss.	 (1)
and (I-A) ofs. 17of that Act to direct that the  Collector
of Kanpur, though no award under s. II had been given, might
on  the	 expiration  of the notice mentioned  v.  9(1)	take
possession of land mentioned in the schedule.	Subsequently
a notice unders. 9was issued which stated that  possession
of  the	 land will be taken within 15 days.   The  appellant
thereupon  filed  a  writ petition underArt.	226of	 the
Constitution in the High Court.	 Two main points were raised
in  the	 petition.  Firstly, it was contended  that  as	 the
acquisition  was  for the purpose of Scheme No.	 XX  of	 the
Board  action had to be taken in accordance with s.  114  of
the Kanpur Act and the schedule thereto and as no action had
been so taken the proceedings for acquisition were bad.	  In
the  second place, it was urged that it was not open to	 the
Governor  to issue the notification unders. 6of  the	Land
Acquisition  Act  without first taking action  unders.  5Athereof.  The High Court rejected both these contentions and
in  the	 result dismissed the writ  petition.	The  present
appeal	was  filed  with a certificate issued  by  the	High
Court.
     In	 the  appeal before this Court	the  same  questions
which were agitated before the High Court were raised.
     Held it is only when the Board proceeds to acquire land
by  virtue of its powers unders. 71thats. 114comes	into
play and the proceedings for acquisition have to take  place
under  theLand Acquisition Actas modified bys.  114read
with the schedule.  But where the acquisition is, as in	 the
present	 case, by the Government under theLand	 Acquisition
Act,  for  public purposes though that purpose	may  be	 the
purpose	 of the Board, the Kanpur Act has no application  at
all  and  the  Government  proceeds  to	 acquire  under	 the
provisions of theLand Acquisition Actalone.
     From the scheme of the Act it is clear that compliance
with   the  provisions	of  s.5-A  is  necessary  before   a
notification
 427
can be issued unders. 6. Even where the Government makes  a
direction unders. 17(1)it is not necessary that it  should
also  make  a direction unders. 17(4).	 If  the  Government
makes a direction only unders. 17(1)the procedure unders.
5-Awould stil -have to be followed before  a	notification
unders. 6is issued. It is only when the  Government	also
makes a declaration unders. 17(4)that it becomes necessary
to  take action unders. 5-Aand make a	 report	 thereunder.Under the Land Acquisition Actan order unders. 17(1)orS.
17(4)can  only be passed with respect to waste  or  arable
land  and it cannot be passed with respect to land which  is
not waste or arable land on which buildings stand.
     just  ass. 17(1)ands. 17(4)are independent of	each
other,s. 17(1.A) ands. 17(4)are independent of each other
and  an order under s. 17 (I-A) would not  necessarily	mean
that an order unders. 17(4)must be passed.
     The  right	 to  file  objections  unders.  5-Ais  a
substantial   right  when  a  person's	property  is   being
threatened  with acquisition and that right cannot be  taken
away  as  if by a side-wind becauses. 17(1-A)	mentionss.
17(1).Section 17(1-A) mentionss. 17(1)merely to indicate
the circumstances and the conditions under which  possession
can be taken.
     It	 was not open to the State Government to say in	 the
notification  unders. 4that proceedings unders. 5-Awill
not take place.	 This part of the notification unders. 4is
beyond the powers of the State Government and in consequence
the  notification unders. 6also, as it was issued  without
taking action unders. 5-A, must fail.



JUDGMENT:CLVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeals Nos. 166 and 167
of 1962.Appeals from the judgment and decrees dated October 25,
1957 of the Allahabad High Court in Special Appeals Nos. 140
and 139 of 1957.J.B. Goyal, for the appellants (in C.A.No. 166 of 62).
1 C. B. Agarwala and P. C. Agarwala, for the appellants	 (in
C.A. No. 167 of 62).428K.   S. Hajela and C. P. Lal, for respondent No. I (in	both
the appeals).C.   P. Lal, for respondent No. 2 (in both the appeals).1963.   April  26.	  The  judgment	 of  the  Court	 was
delivered by
     WANCHOO J.-These two appeals on certificates granted by
the Allahabad High Court raise common questions and will  be
dealt  with together.  It will be enough if we	mention	 the
facts  in appeal No. 167, for the facts in the other  appeal
are  exactly the same, except that the lands in dispute	 are
different in the two cases, though lying in the same area in
the city of Kanpur.Deoki  Nandan,  appellant	in appeal No.  167,  is	 the
lessee	of two plots in Anwarganj, Bans Mandi,	Kanpur,	 and
his  lease is for a period of 99 years from 1943.  On  these
plots there exists a mill known as Om Cotton Ginning and Oil
Mill.  Besides the mill there are pacca godowns also on	 the
plots  and two-thirds of the area is under  buildings  while
onethird  is  open land paved with bricks.  No part  of	 the
land is waste or arable.It	 appears that in February 1932 the Government of  U.
P.  sanctioned	by notification a scheme known	as  Pechbagh
Dalelpurwa Scheme No. XX (hereinafter referred to as  scheme
No.  XX)  of  the  Improvement	Trust  Kanpur.	 It  may  be
mentioned  that	 the Improvement Trust Kanpur has  now	been
replaced  by  the  Development	Board  Kanpur	(hereinafter
referred  to  as  the  Board)  by  the	Kanpur	Urban	Area
Development Act, No. VI of 1945, (hereinafter referred to as
the  Kanpur Act), which repealed the U. P. Town	 Improvement
Act,  No. III of 1920, insofar as it applied to Kanpur.	  It
is not clear what429happened  to  scheme No. XX after 1932; but it	does  appear
that it was not fully carried out.It	 appears that in 1955 a scheme known  as  subsidized
industrial   housing   scheme  was  sponsored	by   Housing
Department  of the U. P. Government.  This scheme was to  be
put  in	 force in four phases. and we are concerned  in	 the
present	 appeal with the fourth phase.	For that  phase	 the
Government  of India had sanctioned over rupees	 two  crores
and  it	 was decided to build 6973 tenements of	 which	1368
were  to  be  in  an Ahata on the  Hamirpur  road.   We	 are
concerned  with	 this part of the scheme, for the  lands  in
dispute	 are  in  this	locality.   The	 decision  in	this
connection was taken by the Government of U. P. in May 1955.
Thereafter  on	January 6, 1956, a notification	 was  issued
unders. 4of the Land Acquisition Act, (No.  I of 1894)  by
the  Governor of U. P. to the effect that the two  plots  in
dispute	 were required for the construction of tenements  in
the fourth phase of the subsidized industrial housing scheme
sponsored by the Government of U. P. as well as for  general
improvement and street scheme No. XX of the Board.  This was
followed   by  a  notification	unders.  6of  the	Land
Acquisition  Act  on January 31,  1956.	  That	notification
further said that the case being one of urgency the Governor
was pleased under sub-ss. (1) and (I-A) ofs. 17of the Land
Acquisition  Act  to direct that the  collector	 of  Kanpur,
though	no  award unders. 11, has been made, might  on	 the
expiration  of	the  notice  mentioned	ins.	9(1)	take
possession  of lands, buildings and structures forming	part
of  the land mentioned in the schedule for public  purposes.
Then  followed	a  notice unders. 9by  the  Collector  on
February 10, 1956, which said that possession would be taken
over 15 days after the issue of the notice i. e. on February
25, 1956.  On receipt of this notice, Deoki Nandan appellant
filed  his objections before the Collector on  February	 21,
1956,430Two  days  later, on February 23, 1956, he  filed  the	writ
petition  in the High Court out of which the present  appeal
has arisen.In	 this  writ petition two main points were  urged  on
behalf	of  the appellant.  It was first urged that  as	 the
acquisition  was  for the purposes of scheme No. XX  of	 the
Board,	action had to be taken in accordance with s. 114  of
the Kanpur Act and the schedule thereto and as no action had
been so taken, the proceedings for acquisition were bad.  In
the  second place, it was urged that it was not open to	 the
Governor  to issue the notification unders. 6of  the	Land
Acquisition  Act  without first taking action unders.	 5-Athereof.   It  is not in dispute that no  action  was  taken
unders. 5-Aand no report was made as required therein.The  writ petition was dismissed by the learned  Single
judge who heard it.  On the first question he held that this
was  not  a case to which the Kanpur Act  applied.   On	 the
second	question,  he  held  thats.  17(4)	applied	 and
therefore it was not necessary to take proceedings to comply
withs. 5-Abefore issuing a notification unders. 6.	Then
followed  an appeal which was heard by a Division  Bench  of
the  High Court.  The appeal court upheld the view taken  by
the learned Single Judge and dismissed the appeal.  However,
the  appeal court granted a certificate as prayed  for,	 and
that is how the matter has come up before us.The same two questions which were agitated in the	High
Court have been raised before us.  In the first place, it is
urged  that as the acquisition was for scheme No. XX of	 the
Board,	action should have been taken under the	 Kanpur	 Act
and  as	 this was Dot done the entire  proceedings  are	 bad
including  the issue of the notifications unders. 4and  s.6. In the second place, it is urged thats. 17(4) could not431apply  in  the present case and no notification unders.  6could be issued unlesss. 5-Ahad been complied with.  As no
such compliance was admittedly made, the notification  under
s. 6 in any case is bad, even if the notification unders. 4is good.Turning  now to the first point, the main	reliance  of
the  appellant is ons. 114of' the Kanpur Act, which is  in
these terms :-"Modification  of	 the Land  Acquisition	Act,
	      1894-For	the  purpose of the  acquisition  of
	      land for the Board under the landAcquisition
	      Act, 1894-(a)   the	 said  Act shall be subject  to	 the
	      modification specified in the Schedule to this
	      Act;(b)   the	 award	of  the	 Tribunal  shall  be
	      deemed to be the award of the court under	 theLand Acquisition Act, 1894."We may also refer tos. 108which provides for	constitution
of the tribunal ands. 109which lays down that the tribunal
shall  perform the functions of the court with reference  to
the  acquisition  of  land  for the  Board  under  theLand
Acquisition Act, 1894.	Further, it is necessary to refer to
s. 71 (1) also which provides that "the Board may, with	 the
previous  sanction  of the State  Government,  acquire	land
under  the provisions of theLand Acquisition Act, 1894,  as
modified by the provisions of this Act, for carrying out any
of the purposes of this Act".  The argument on behalf of the
appellants  is that where land is acquired for the  purposes
of  the	 Board action has to be taken under ch.	  VII  which
provides  for various kinds of development schemes  for	 the
Board and the procedure for making such schemes.  After
this  procedure laid down in ch.  VII is gone through,	(and
it is not in dispute that no s c procedure was gone  through
in the present case insofar as scheme No. XX is	 concerned),
s. 114 comes432into  play  and	 acquisition has to  take  place  under	 the
modified  provisions of theLand Acquisition Acteven  where
the  Government	 is  acquiring the  land.   Stress  in	this
connection is laid on the words "acquisition of land for the
Board"	ins. 114, and it is said that	 whenever  there  is
acquisition of land for the Board, action can only be taken,
even  though  it is the Government which  is  acquiring	 the
land, under the modified provisions of theLand	 Acquisition
Act,contained in the Kanpur Act.We are of opinion that this argument is fallacious.  If
one  looks at the scheme of the Kanpur Act, one	 finds	that
ch.   VII provides for various kinds of development  schemes
and the procedure for finalising them.	After the scheme  is
finalised  under  ch.  VII power is given to  the  Board  to
purchase  the  land required for the scheme or	take  it  on
lease  unders. 70.  Thens. 71provides in the	 alternative
that  the Board may with the previous sanction of the  State
Government  acquire  land under the provisions of  theLand
Acquisition Actas modified by the provisions of the  Kanpur
Act.  It is only when the Board proceeds to acquire land  by
virtue of its powers unders. 71thats. 114comes into play
and the proceedings for acquisition have to take place under
theLand Acquisition Actas modified bys. 114read with the
schedule.   It is true thats. 114speaks of acquisition  of
land  for  the Board, and the argument is that whens.	 114speaks	of acquisition of land for the Board, it applies  to
acquisition of land for the Board by the Government and	 not
to acquisition by the Board, which is provided bys. 71(1).
This interpretation of's. 114is in our opinion  incorrect.Section 71certainly provides for acquisition of land by the
Board when it says that the Board may acquire land under the
provisions  of theLand Acquisition Actas modified  by	 the
Kanpur	Act;  but  that' acquisition is also  by  that	very
section for carrying out the433purposes  of the Act i.e. for the Board.  Therefore whens.
71authorises	the  Board to acquire land  under  theLand
Acquisition   Actas  modified	 by  the  Kanpur  Act,	 the
acquisition is for the Board.Section 71further speaks  of
the  modification of the provisions of theLand	 Acquisition
Act.  This modification is not provided ins. 71itself.  In
order to find out the modification we have to go tos.	114.
Therefore, s.114 merely serves the purpose of indicating the
modification which has been mentioned ins. 71.	 There is no
reason	to hold, because the words "acquisition of land	 for
the Board" appear in s.114, that this acquisition is by	 the
Government  for	 the Board.  The scheme of  the	 Kanpur	 Act
clearly	 shows	that  the Board frames	a  scheme  and	then
decides to acquire the land for itself tinders. 71with the
previous  sanction  of	the  State  Government.	  If  it  so
decides,s. 114applies to such an acquisition by the  Board
for  itself  with  the necessary modification  in  theLand
Acquisition Act.  We may in this connection refer tos. 109,
which describes the duties of the tribunal.  Now there is no
doubt that where the Board is acquiring land under" s. 71 of
the Kanpur Act, it is the tribunal which takes the place  of
the court in theLand Acquisition Act.	Buts. 109also uses
the  same words, namely acquisition of land for	 the  Board.
As the acquisition by the Board is also for the Board, there
can  be no doubt that the scheme of the Kanpur Act  is	that
the  Board  first proceeds under ch.  VII, then	 decides  to
acquire	 land unders. 71. and if it so decides s.114  comes
into play with the modifications in theLand Acquisition Actmentioned  in  the  schedule.	Two  modifications  in	 the
schedule  are the replacement of the notification under	 s.4
by  the	 notification  unders. 53in	 ch.   VII  and	 the
replacement  of notification unders. 6by the	notification
under s.60 also in chap.  VI I. It is obvious that ch.	VII,
s.  '11, s.1 14 and the other provisions in ch.	 XI  dealing
with modifications and the modifications in the schedule are
all part of one scheme, where the Board is acquiring434land  itself for its own purpose with the previous  sanction
of  Government;	 but  where the acquisition is,	 as  in	 the
present	 case, by the Government under theLand	 Acquisition
Act,  for  public  purpose though that purpose	may  be	 the
purpose	 of the Board, the Kanpur Act has no application  at
all.,  and  the	 Government proceeds to	 acquire  under	 the
provisions   of	 theLand  Acquisition	 Actalone.	 The
contention  therefore on behalf of the appellants  that	 the
Kanpur	Act  has not been complied with	 and  therefore	 the
proceedings for acquisition of land are bad has no force and
must be rejected.We now come to the second point raised on behalf of the
appellants.   For that purpose we may briefly refer  to	 the
scheme	of  theLand Acquisition Act,  The  proceedings	 for
acquisition start with a preliminary notification under s.4.
By  that notification the Government notifies that  land  in
any  locality  is needed or is likely to be needed  for	 any
public	purpose.  On that notification certain	consequences
follow	and  authority is conferred on	an  officer  'either
generally or specially by Government and on his servants and
workmen to enter upon and survey and take levels of any land
in  such locality, to dig or bore into the sub-soil,  to  do
all  other acts necessary to ascertain whether the  land  is
adapted	 for such purpose, to set out the boundaries of	 the
land proposed, to be taken, and so on.	Thens. 5-Aprovides
that  any  person  interested in any  land  which  has	been
notified in s.4, may within thirty days of the issue of	 the
notification  object to the acquisition of the land  .or  of
any  land  in the locality as the case	maybe.	 Every	such
objection shall be made to. the Collector in writing and the
Collector  has to give the objector an opportunity of  being
heard.	 After	hearing	 all  objections  and  after  making
further inquiry if any, as he thinks fit, the Collector	 has
to  submit  the	 case for the  decision	 of  the  Government
together with the record of the proceedings held by him	 and
the report435containing  his	 recommendations  on  the  objections.	 the
decision of the Government on the objections is final.	Then
comes  the notification under s.6, which provides that	when
the  appropriate government is satisfied  after	 considering
the  report, if any, made unders. 5-Athat  any  particular
land is needed for a public purpose, a declaration shall  be
made  to that effect and published in the official  gazette.
After  such a declaration has been made under s.6,  the	 Co-
llector	 has to take order for acquisition of land.   It  is
marked out, measured and planned unders. 8if necessary and
notice	is  given  unders. 9to  persons  interested.	 The
Collector then holds inquiry under s. II and makes an award.
After  the award is made the Collector has got the power  to
take  possession of the land unders. 16and the  land	then
vests	absolutely   in	 the  Government   free	  from	 all
encumbrances.It will be clear from this scheme that compliance	with
the provisions ofs. 5-Ais necessary before a	notification
can  be	 issued	 under	s. 6. As  soon	as  the	 preliminary
notification is issued under s.4, the officer authorised  by
Government  may enter upon the land to survey it and  to  do
all  other necessary acts to ascertain whether the  land  is
adapted for the purpose for which it is to be acquired,	 and
this action, if taken, will give sufficient notice to  those
interested to object.  If objections are made the  Collector
will  consider those objections and make his  recommendation
thereon	 in his report to Government.  If no objections	 are
made  the Collector will report that no objection  has	been
made   and   the  Government  then  proceeds  to   issue   a
notification   under  s.6.  In	either	case  however,	 the
Collector has got to make a report with his  recommendations
on the objections if they are filed or inform the Government
that  there  are  no objections filed in  pursuance  of	 the
notification  unders.	 4and it  is  thereafter  that	 the
Government is empowered unders. 6to issue a  notification.
This, as We have said,is the usual procedure to be followed436before	the notification under s.6 is issued: To this  usual
procedure there is however an exception under s.17, and that
is  why	 ins. 6we find the words "if any"  in	 the  clause
after  considering the report , if any, made unders.	5A".
When action is taken unders. 17(4), it is not necessary to
follow the procedure ins. 5-Aand a notification under	 s.6
can  be issued without a report from the Collector unders.
5-A.   In the present appeals we are concerned withss.  17(1) and 17 (4), which we now read:-"17  (1).	 In cases of urgency,  whenever	 the
	      appropriate Government so directs, the Collec-
	      tor, though no such award has been made,	may,
	      on  the  expiration of fifteen days  from	 the
	      publication of the notice mentioned insection
	      9,  sub-section  (1), take possession  of	 any
	      waste   or  arable  land	needed	for   public
	      purposes	or  for a company, such	 land  shall
	      thereupon	 vest absolutely in the	 Government,
	      free from all encumbrances.""17 (4).	In the case of any land to which, in
	      the opinion of the appropriate Government, the
	      provisions  of sub-section (1) or	 sub-section
	      (2) are applicable, the appropriate Government
	      may  direct that the provisions ofsection  5Ashall  not apply, and if it does so direct,  a
	      declaration  may be- made undersection  6in
	      respect  of  the land at any  time  after	 the
	      publication of the notification undersection
	      4, subsection (1)."It will be seen thats. 17(1) gives power to the Government
to direct the Collector, though no award has been made under
s. 11, to take possession of any waste or arable land needed
for public purpose and such land thereupon vests  absolutely
in the Government free from all encumbrances.  If action  is
taken unders. 17(1), taking possession and vesting which437are  provided  ins. 16after the award  unders.  11are
accelerated  and  can  take place  fifteen  days  after	 the
publication  of the notice unders. 9. Then comes s..17	 (4)
which  provides	 that  in  case of any	land  to  which	 the
provisions of sub-s. (1) are applicable, the Government	 may
direct that the provisions ofs. 5-Ashall not apply and  if
it  does so direct, a declaration may be made unders. 6in
respect of the land at any time after the publication of the
notification unders. 4(1).  It will be seen that it is not
necessary even where the Government makes a direction  under
s.  17 (1) that it should also make a direction unders.  17(4).   If the Government makes a direction only unders.  17(1)  the  procedure  unders. 5-Awould	 still	have  to  be
followed before a notification unders. 6is issued,  though
after  that procedure has been followed and  a	notification
unders. 6is issued the Collector gets the power  to	take
possession  of the land after the notice unders. 9without
waiting for the award and on such taking possession the land
shall	vest   absolutely  in  Government  free	  from	 all
encumbrances.	It is only when the Government also makes  a
declaration  unders. 17(4) that it becomes unnecessary  to
take  action unders. 5-Aand make a report thereunder.	  It
may  be	 that generally where an order is made unders.  17(1), an order unders. 17(4) is also passed; but in law  it
is  not necessary that this should be so.  It will  also  be
seen  that under theLand Acquisition Actan order unders.
17(1) ors. 17(4) can only be passed with respect to waste
or arable land and it cannot be passed with respect to	land
which is not waste or arable and on which buildings stand.This  brings us to s. 17 (I-A) introduced ins.  17of
the  Land  Acquisition Act by the Land	Acquisition  (U.  P.
Amendment) Act, (No.  XXII of 1954).Section 6of that	 Act
is in these terms :-"After  sub-section (1) of section 17  of	 the
	      Principal Act (i. a.Land Acquisition Act) the438following	 shall	be inserted as	a  new	sub-
	      section (I-A):,(I-A).	The power to take  possession  under
	      sub-section  (1) may also be exercised in	 the
	      case of other than waste or arable land, where
	      the land is acquired for or in connection with
	      sanitary	improvements of any kind or  planned
	      development."It is not in dispute before us that the land in the  present
case  was  required  for  planned  development.	   Therefore
subsection (1-A) as inserted by theU. P. Actinto theLand
Acquisition  Actapplies.  The contention on behalf  of	 the
appellants  however is that sub's. (1-A) gives merely  power
to  take possession of land other than waste or arable	land
where  the land is acquired for or in connection with  sani-
tary improvements of any kind or planned development.  It is
further urged that sub-s. (1) is mentioned in sub-s. (I	 -A)
merely	to  import the circumstances in which the  power  to
take possession may be exercised with respect to land  other
than  waste  or arable and the time when such power  may  be
exercised  thearguement	 further is thats. 17(4)  was	 not
amended	 by  theU.P. ActXXII by including  the  new	sub-
s.(1.A)	 also  in that sub-section.  Sub-section  (4)  still
stands	as it was; therefore it still applies to  waste	 and
arable land only.There  is	force in this argument.	 There has  been  no
change	by  theU. P. Actin sub-s. (1) and  therefore	when
sub-s. (4) speaks of any land to which sub-s. (1) applies it
still refers only to waste or arable land and no other.	  It
is  true that by sub s. (I-A) as introduced byU. P. Actin
s.  17, power has been given to take possession in  case  of
land  other  than  the waste or arable; but  this  does	 not
necessarily  mean that sub-s. (4) will also apply to a	case
of )and other than waste or arable simply because power	 has
been439given by sub-s. (I-A) to take possession of land other	than
waste  or  arable.  It seems to us that when sub-s.  (1)  is
mentioned in sub-s. (I-A) as introduced by theU. P. Actit
only  means  that  the	power  can  be	exercised  to	take
possession  of land other than waste or arable in  the	same
circumstances and at the same time as it could be  exercised
with  respect to arable or waste land as provided in  sub-s.
(1),  and nothing more	Sub-section (I-A) as  introduced  by
theU. P. Acttherefore has the effect only of	accelerating
the taking of possession which normally can take place after
the  award  has been made underS. 11in the  case  of	land
other  than waste or arable in the circumstances  and  under
the  conditions mentioned in sub-s. (1).  But  sub-s.  (I-A)
does not amend sub-s. (1) so as to include within that	sub-
section	 land  other than waste or arable.   Therefore	when
sub-s.	(4)  was  not amended by the U.	 P.  legislature  to
include sub-s. (1-A) as introduced by it  can apply only  to
waste  or  arable land mentioned in sub-s. (1),	 which	also
remained unamended.  We have already pointed out that it  is
not  necessary in law that when an order is passed unders.
17(1),  an  order underS. 17(4)  must  also	 be  passed.
similarly if an order is passed under sub-S.	   (1-A)  it
does  not  necessarily follow that an  order  must  bepassed
underS. 17(4).Sections 17(1) and 17 (4) are independent
of  each other in the sense that an order under	 the  former
does  not  necessarily require an order	 under	the  latter.
Similarly  s. 17 (I-A) must be independent ofS. 17(4)	 and
an  order under S. 17 (I-A) would not necessarily mean	that
an  order  underS.  17(4)  must  be	 passed.   In  these
circumstances  it  seems  to  us  that	if  the	 legislature
intended that provisions of sub-s. (4) should also apply  to
a  case falling under sub-s. (I-A), it has failed  to  carry
out that intention.  Sub-section (I-A) has been added as  an
independent  sub-section  and  no amendment  has  been	made
either	in  sub-s. (1) or sub-s. (4); nor has  any  separate
provision been made440for  applying sub-s. (4) to a case falling under  sub-s.  (I-A) and so subs. (4) cannot be applied to sub-s. (I-A).	 The
right to file objections unders. 5-Ais a substantial right
when   a   person's  property  is  being   threatened	with
acquisition  and  we cannot accept that that  right  can  be
taken  away  as	 if  by a  side-wind  because  sub-s.  (I-A)
mentions sub-s. (I).  As we have already pointed out  sub-s.
(1)  has been mentioned in sub s. (I-A) merely	to  indicate
the circumstances and the conditions under which  possession
can  be taken.	The legislature has mentioned sub-s. (1)  in
sub-s. (I-A) as a measure of economy; otherwise sub-s. (I-A)
would have read as follows :-"In cases of urgency, whenever the appropriate
	      Government  so directs, the Collector,  though
	      no  such	award  has been made,  may,  on	 the
	      expiration   of	fifteen	  days	 from	 the
	      publication of the notice mentioned insection
	      9,  sub-section  (1), take possession  of	 any
	      land  other  than	 waste or  arable  land	 for
	      public purposes where the land is acquired for
	      or in connection with sanitary improvements of
	      any kind or planned development."Now  if there had been Do economy of words and sub-s.  (I-A)
had read as we have indicated above, it could Dot have	been
possible  to  argue that sub-s. (4) ofs.  17also  covered
cases  ofs. 17(1-A).	 Therefore, simply because  for	 the
sake of economy of words the legislature has used the  words
which it did in sub-s. (I-A), it cannot be said that it	 was
either amending sub-s. (1) or sub-s. (4).  In the absence of
such amendment either in sub-s. (1) or sub-s. (4) and in the
absence of any specific provision being introduced ins.  17by which sub-s. (4) was also to apply to the new sub-s.	 (I-
A), it cannot be said that power was conferred on the  State
Government to apply sub-s. (4) also to a case falling  under
sub-s. (1-A),441simply	by the introduction of sub-s. (I-A) in the  form  in
which  it  was	introduced ins. 17.  We  are  therefore  of
opinion that it was not open to the State Government to	 say
in the notification unders. 4that proceedings unders. 5-Ashall  not take place.	This part of the notification  under
s. 4 is therefore beyond the powers of the State Government.
In  consequence the notification unders. 6also as  it	 was
issued	without taking action unders. 5-Amust	 fall.	 The
appeals must therefore be allowed and the notification under
s.  6  and that part of the notification unders.  4,  which
says that the-Governor was pleased to direct that under sub-
s. (4) ofs. 17, the provisions of s. 5- A shall not  apply,
are bad and are hereby set aside.  Rest of the	notification
unders. 4will stand and it will be open to the  Government
if  it	so  chooses to proceed with  the  acquisition  after
action is taken unders. 5-Aand thereafter to issue a noti-
fication  unders. 6of the Land Acquisition Act.   In	 the
circumstances we feel that the appellants should be given an
opportunity  unders. 5-Anow, though the period for  making
objections provided in that section expired long ago in view
of  the	 misunderstanding  of the law on  the  part  of	 the
Government  by	treating  the  objections  made	 before	 the
Collector  after  the  issue of the notices unders.  9as
objections  unders. 5-A.  The appellants  will  get  their
costs of this Court from the respondents; one set of hearing
fee.Appeals allowed.442