Take notes as you read a judgment using ourVirtual Legal Assistantand get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out ourPremium Memberservices --Free for one month.Supreme Court of IndiaPayare Lal vs State Of Punjab on 30 August, 1961Equivalent citations: 1962 AIR  690, 1962 SCR  Supl. (3) 328Author: A SarkarBench: Sarkar, A.K.PETITIONER:
PAYARE LAL

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF PUNJAB

DATE OF JUDGMENT:
30/08/1961

BENCH:
SARKAR, A.K.
BENCH:
SARKAR, A.K.
SINHA, BHUVNESHWAR P.(CJ)
MUDHOLKAR, J.R.

CITATION:
 1962 AIR  690		  1962 SCR  Supl. (3) 328
 CITATOR INFO :
 R	    1962 SC1198	 (30)
 D	    1977 SC1066	 (30)


ACT:
Criminal Trial--Transfer of Special Judge--Successor, if can
try  on	 evidence  partly  recorded by	him  and  partly  by
predecessor--Special   Judge,  if  a   magistrate--Want	  of
competency,  if	 can be cured--Criminal Law  Amendment	Act,
1952  (46 of 1952). s. 8, sub-ss. (1), (3) Code of  Criminal
Procedure, 1898 (V of 1898),ss. 251to259,350,537.



HEADNOTE:
The  appellant	and another were  prosecuted'  for  offences
unders.  5(2)of the Prevention of Corruption	 Act,  1947.
The  trial commenced before the special judge who heard	 the
evidence   but	 before	 he  could  deliver   judgment	 was
transferred and was succeeded by another special judge.	 The
latter	did  not recall the witnesses and did not  hear	 the
evidence  over again, but proceeded with the  trial  without
any  objection from either side from the stage at which	 his
predecessor had left.  He convicted both the accused.
On  appeal, the Punjab High Court held thats. 350Criminal
procedure  Code applied to the trial before a special  judge
in view ofs. 8(1)of the Criminal Law Amendment Act,  1952,
and the succeeding special judge was entitled to proceed  on
the evidence recorded by his predecessor.
The  controversy is whethers. 330of the Code	of  Criminal
Procedure  is applicable to a special judge under  sub-s.(1)
,ofs. 8of the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1952, though  it
is  not applicable under sub-s. (3) of the  Act.   Therefore
the  question is what is meant by the words  "The  procedure
prescribed by the court...... for the trial of warrant cases
by magistrate" in sub-s.(1) ofs. 8of the Act, and  whether
s.  350of  the Codeprescribe one of	the  rules  of	such
procedure.The  Actwas  since amended and  therein  it  is  expressly
provided  that s.350of the Codeapplies to the	 proceedings
before	a special judge.  The amendment does not govern	 the
present	 proceeding as the impugned part of the	 proceedings
was concluded before the amendment.
Held,  that  theCriminal Law Amendment Act, 1952,  did	 not
intend	thats. 350of the Criminal Procedure Code would  be
available  as a rule of procedure prescribed for the  trials
of  warrant cases, to a special judge as the  special  Judge
was not a magistrate for the purpose of the Act not did	 the
Act require before the amendment that he was to be deemed to
be such.
			    329The  Actin using the words "procedure	 prescribed  bythe
Code......  for	 the trial of warrant cases  by	 magistrate"
meant only thess. 251to259of the Criminal Procedure Code
as  expressly  referred	 in  the  code	as  containing	 the
procedure  St specified for the trials of warrant  cases  by
magistrate  and did not contemplates. 350of the Code as  a
procedure so prescribed.
Held,  further,	 that  where in a case	 there	is  want  of
competency  and not a mere irregularity,s. 537of the	Code
of  Criminal  Procedure has no application.   It  cannot  be
called in aid to make what was incompetent, competent.
Held,  also, that it is the right of an accused person	that
his  case  should be decided by a judge who  has  heard	 the
whole of it and that very clear words would be necessary  to
take away such an important and well established right.
In  the	 present case the succeeding special  judge  had  no
authority  under  the law to proceed with the trial  of	 the
case from the stage at which hi-, predecessor in office left
it, and the conviction of the appellant cannot be  supported
as  he had not heard the evidence in the case himself.	 The
proceeding before the succeeding special judge were  clearly
incompetent.  There has been no proper trial of the case and
there should be one.
In re-Vaidyanatha Iyer, (1954) 1 M.. I,. cable.Pulukuri  Kotayya v. King Emperor, (1947) L. R. 74 I  A.  65
and Kimbray v. Dapper, (1868) 3 Q. B. 160, referred to
In re-Fernandez. (1958) 11 M. L. J.- 294, approved,.



JUDGMENT:CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 240  of
1960.Appeal	by special leave from the judgment  and-order  dated
November  25,  1958, of the Punjab High	 Court	in  Criminal
Appeal No. 114 of 1954.Jai  Gopal  Sethi,  C. L. Sareen and R. L.  Kohli,  for	 the
appellant.N.   S. Bindra, R. H. Dhebar and D. Gupta, for respondent.
1961.	  August  30.	The  Judgement	of  the	 Court	 was
delivered by
SARKAR,	 J.  The appellant Payare Lal was the  Tehsildar  of
Patiala.  He and Bishan Chand, a Patwar. clerk of the Tehsil
Office,	 were  prosecuted for offences under s.5(2)  of	 the
Prevention of330Corruption Act, 1947.The Criminal Law Amendment Act,	1952
(Act XLVI of 1952), to which it will be convenient hereafter
to  refer  as the Act, required the trial to be	 held  by  a
special	 Judge	appointed under it and	in  accordance	with
certain	 provisionsof	 the  Codeof	Criminal   Procedure
mentioned  ins. 8of the Act.	 The Principal	question  in
this  appeal  turns  on the construction of  sub-s.  (1)  of
this .section which we will later set out.
The  trial  commenced before S. Narinder Singh	the  special
Judge,	Patiala.  He heard the evidence but before he  could
deliver	 a judgment he was transferred and was succeeded  by
S.  Jagjit  Singh.   S.	 Jagjit Singh  did  not	 recall	 the
witnesses  and hear the evidence over again,  but  proceeded
without any objection from either side, with the trial	from
the  stage at which his predecessor had left it	 and  having
heard  the  arguments  of the  advocates  for  the  parties,
delivered  his judgment convicting both the accused  of	 the
offences with which they had been charged and passed certain
sentences on them.The  accused appealed against their conviction to  the	High
Court  of  Punjab.  The appeals came to be  heard  by  Mehar
Singh  J.,  who,,  though no point had	been  taken  by	 the
accused, himself felt considerable difficulty as to  whether
S.  Jagjit  Singh had the power to decide the  case  on	 the
evidence recorded by his predecessor and referred the matter
to  a  larger  bench  taking the  view	that-if	 the  course
followed   was	defective,  the	 defect	 would	be  one	  of
jurisdiction  of  the Court and could not be  cured  by	 the
consent of parties.The case was thereupon heard by a bench of that High,  Court
constituted  by	 Gurnam Singh and Mehar Singh JJ.  who	took
different  views.  Gurnam Singh J. held thats. 350of	 the
Code applied to the trial before a special Judge in view  of
s.  8(1) of the Act and under the terms ofs. 350, which  we
will later set out, S. Jagjit Singh was entitled to  proceed
on the evidence recorded by his predecessor331S.   Narinder  Singh,  while  Mehar Singh  J.,	was  of	 the
opinion thats. 8(1)of the Act did not makes. 350of	that
Code applicable to such a trial.  He also held that what  S.
Jagjit Singh had done was not a matter of mere	irregularity
curable	 under	s.  537of the Code.  The  matter  was	then
referred  to Passey J., who agreed with Gurnam Singh  J.  On
the question ofs. 537of the Code, Gurnam Singh and  Passey
JJ. expressed no opinion in the view that they had taken  of
s. 8(1) of the Act.The appeals were thereafter heard on the merits by Tek Chand
J.  who upheld the conviction of the appellant	but  reduced
the  sentence  passed on him.  He,, however,  acquitted	 the
other accused Bishan Chand giving him the benefit of  doubt.
The  appellant	has  now come up to this  Court	 in  further
appeal with special leave.  There is no appeal by the  State
against the acquittal of Bishan Chand.There  is no covntroversy that the general principle of	 law
is  that  a judge or magistrate can decide a  case  only  on
evidence  taken	 by  him.Section 350of  the	 Code  is  a
statutory  departure from this principle.  That	 section  so
far as material was at the date S. Jagjit Singh decided	 the
case in these terms :S.    350.   Whenever  any  Magistrate,  after
	      having	 heard and recorded the whole or any
	      part of the evidence in an inquiry or a trial,
	      ceases  to exercise jurisdiction therein,	 and
	      is succeeded by another Magistrate who has and
	      who   exercises	such   jurisdictions,	 the
	      Magistrate  so  succeeding  may  act  on	 the
	      evidence	so recorded by his  predecessor,  or
	      partly recorded by his predecessor and  partly
	      recorded	by himself or be may resumption	 the
	      witnesses and recommence the inquiry or trial
It  is	only if this provision was available  to  S.  Jagjit
Singh that the course taken by him can be supported.332As  we	have  said earlier,s. 8of the	 Act  makes  certain
provisionsof the Codeapplicable to the proceedings  before
a special Judge The question is whethers. 350of the  Code.
was  one  of such provisions.  The answer to  this  question
will depend on the construction of sub ss.(1) and (3) ofs.
8of the Act the material portions of which we now set out.S.    8	(1)-A	special	  judge	  may	take
	      cognizance  of  offences without	the  accused
	      being  committed	to him. for  trial,  and  in
	      trying  the accused persons, shall follow	 the
	      procedure	 prescribed bythe Codeof  Criminal
	      Procedure, 1898 ... for the trial of- warrant'
	      cases by magistrates.(3)   Save   as	provided   in	 sub-section
	      (1)  ........  the provisionsof the  Codeof
	      Criminal	Procedure,  1898, shall, so  far  as
	      they are not inconsistent with this Act, apply
	      to  the proceedings before a special  Judge  ;
	      and  for the purposes of the said	 provisions,
	      the Court of the special judge shall be deemed
	      to be a Court of session trying cases  without
	      a	   jury	   or	 without    the	   aid	  of
	      assessors........................In substance these sub-sections provide that a special Judge
shall  follow the procedure prescribed bythe Codefor	 the
trial  of  warrant  cases by magistrates and  save  to	this
extent., the provision-,,of the Codeapplicable to a  Court
of  session,  shall govern him as if he were  such  a  Court
subject to certain qualifications which are not relevant for
the  present case.  There is no controversy thats.  350of
the  Code is applicable only to magistrates and not a  Court
of  session  and cannot therefore be applied  to  a  special
Judge under sub-s. (3) as it makes only those provisionsof
the  Codeapplicable to him which would apply to a Court  of
session.   The only controversy is whether that	 section  is
applicable to a special Judge under sub-s.(1) ofs. 8of the
Act.  If it is so applicable, it must be applied333though under sub-s. (3) it is not applicable, for this	sub-
section, is to have effect "'Save as provided in  subsection
(1)".The  real  question  is, what is meant	by  the	 words	"the
procedure prescribed bythe Code.................. for	 the
trial of warrant cases by magistrates" Ins. 8(1)of the Act
? Doess. 350of the Code prescribe one of the rules of such
procedure ? It is necessary however to point out that by  an
amendment made in the Act after judgment had been  delivered
in  this  case	by S. Jagjit Singh, it	has  been  expressly
provided thats. 350of the Code applies to the	 proceedings
before a special Judge.	 On the amended Act, therefore,	 the
question  that	has  arisen in this case,  would  no  longer
arise.	 For reasons to be hereafter stated, this  amendment
clearly	 does  not govern the proceedings before  S.  Jagjit
Singh  and this case has to be decided without reference  to
the amendment.Is  was	 once  held  by the Madras  High  Court	 in  In	 re,
Vaidyanatha  Iyer (1) thats. 350of the Code  prescribed  a
rule  of  procedure  for  the  trial  of  warrant  cases  as
mentioned ins. 8(1) of the Act.  This seems to be the only
reported  decision  taking that view.  All  other  decisions
which  have  been brought to our notice	 take  the  contrary
view.  Even in Madras, in In re Fernandez (2), a Full  Bench
of  the High Court has now hold thats. 350of the Code	 was
not  applicable to a special Judge and has overruled  In  re
Vaidyanatha  Iyer (1).	That appears to be the	position  on
the authorities.It  is true thats. 350of the Code is a provision  applying
to  all	 magistrates  and therefore, also  to  a  magistrate
trying a warrant case.	That however does not in our opinion
decide the question.  We think it 'relevant to observe	that
it  is a right of an accused person that his case should  be
decided	 by  a judge who has heard the whole of	 it  and  we
agree with the view expressed in Fernandez's case(2)
(1)  (1954) 1 M.L.J. 15; A.I.R. (1954) Mad. 350.
(2) (1958) 11 M.L.J. 294.334that  very clear words would be necessary to take away	such
an  important and well 'established right.  We find no	such
clear words here.We  turn now to the word used.	When sub-s. (1) ofs.  8of
the Act talks of a procedure prescribed bythe Codefor	 the
trial  of warrant cases by magistrates it is  reasonable  to
think  that  it has the provisions and the languageof	 the
Codein view.	When we look atthe Code, we find  that	 ch.
XXI  is	 headed "of the.  Trial of Warrant  Cases  by  Magi-
strates".  This chapter consists ofss. 251to259.Section
251is in these terms :S.    251	 In  the trial of warrant  cases  by
	      Magistrates, the Magistrate shall,-(a)   in	any   case instituted  on  a  police
	      report,  follow  the  procedure  specified  insection 251A; and(b)   in any other case, follow the  procedure
	      specified	 in  the other	provisions  of	this
	      Chapter.The  Code,  therefore, expressly refers toss.	 251-259as
containing the procedure specified for the trial of  warrant
cases  by  magistrates;	 this then,,  is  the  procedure  it
prescribes  for	 the  trial  of such  cases.   It  would  be
legitimate,  therefore, to think that the Act in  using	 the
words "procedure prescribed bythe Code...... for the  trial
of  warrant  cases  by magistrates" also  meant	 only  these
sectionsof the Codeand did not contemplates. 350of	 the
Code  as a procedure so prescribed, though that	 section  is
applicable  to the proceedings before a magistrate trying  a
warrant	 case.	It does not seem to us that the	 words	"the
procedure  prescribed bythe Code......... for the trial  of
warrant cases by magistrates" meant a procedure which may be
followed  by magistrates in all cases.	Further mores.	 350occurs	in  a chapterof the Codewhich deals  with  general
provisions  relating  to inquiries and trials and is  not  a
provision which has been specifically prescribed bythe Codefor application to the335trial  of  warrant cases by magistrates, as aress.  251to259.
Again,s. 350of the Code cannot, without doing violence  to
the  language  used  in it, be applied	to  the	 proceedings
before	a special Judge Clearly it cannot be, applied  where
its terms make such application impossible.  Now the section
can  be applied only when one magistrate  succeeds  another.
It  lays  down what the succeeding magistrate can  do.	 Now
suppose	 one  special Judge succeeds another.	How  can  he
exercise  the powers conferred by the section ? The  section
applies	 only  when the predecessor is	a  magistrate.	 The
predecessor in the case assumed is however a special  Judge.
Such a Judge is not a magistrate for the purpose of the Act,
nor does the Act require that he is to be deemed to be such.Section 8(1) of the Act which only requires a special Judge
to  follow  the procedure for the trial of a  warrant  case,
cannot	justify	 the  creation	of  a  fiction	making	 the
predecessor  special  Judge, a magistrate.  It	is  of	some
interest  to note here that the amendment to the  Act  which
expressly makess. 350of the Code applicable to proceedings
before	a special Judge also provides that for the  purposes
of so applying the section, "a special Judge shall be deemed
to be a magistrate".  Clearly, the legislature thought	that
unless	such a fiction was created, the application  of	 the
section	 to  the proceedings before a  special	Judge  would
create	difficulties or anomalies.  Therefore also, the	 Act
could not in our view, have intended thats. 350of the Code
would  be  available  to  a special  Judge  as	a  rule,  of
procedure prescribed for the trial of warrant cases.
For all these reasons, we would prefer the opinion expressed
by  Mehar Singh J. We think that under the Act, as it  stood
before	its amendment as aforesaid,s. 350of the  Code	 was
not available when one special Judge succeeded another.	 'we
hold that S. Jagjit Singh had no authority336under the law to proceed with the trial of the case from the
stage at which S. Narinder Singh left it.  The conviction by
S.  Jagjit Singh of the appellant cannot be supported as  he
had  not  heard	 the  evidence	in  the	 case  himself	 The
proceedings before him were clearly incompetent.
It is then said that this defect was a mere irregularity and
the  conviction of the appellant can, if sustainable on	 the
evidence, be upheld under EA. 537of the Code.	In regard to
this  section, it was said by the Privy Council inPulukuri
Kotayyam v. King Emperor(1),
	      "When  a	trial  is  conducted  in  a   manner
	      different from that prescribed bythe Code(as
	      in N. A. Subramania Iyer's case, 1901 L.R.  28
	      I.A.  257), the trial is bad, and no  question
	      of  curing an irregularity arises but  if	 the
	      trial is conducted substantially in the manner
	      prescribed bythe Code, but some	irregularity
	      occurs  in  the course of	 such  conduct,	 the
	      irregularity  can be cured undersection	537,
	      and none the less so because the	irregularity
	      involves, as must nearly always be the case, a
	      breach   of   one	  or  more   of	  the	very
	      comprehensive, provisionsof the Code".
 It  seems  to	us  that the case  falls  within  the  first
category mentioned by the Privy Council.  This is not a case
of  irregularity but want of competency.  Apart froms.	 350which,	as  we have said, is not applicable to	the  present
case,  the,  Code, does not conceive of such a	trial.	 The
trial offends the cardinal principle of law earlier  stated,
the acceptance of which bythe Codeis clearly manifest from
the  fact  thatthe  Codeembodies  an	 exception  to	that
principle  ins. 350.  Therefore, we think that s.  .537of
the Codehas no application.  It cannot be called in aid  to
make  what  was incompetent, competent.	 There has  been  no
proper trial of the case and there should be one.
(1)  (1947) L.R. 74 I.A. 65, 75.337'Then it is said or,. behalf of the appellant that we should
not  send  the	case back for a fresh trial  but  decide  it
ourselves  on the evidence on the record.  Coming  from	 the
appellant,   it	  is  a	 somewhat   surprising	 contention.
According to him, a point which we have accepted, there	 has
realy  been  no proper trial of the case.  It  would  follow
from this that there has to be one.  In the absence of	such
a trial we cannot even look at the evidence on the record.
Lastly,	 we have to say a few words on the amendment of	 the
Act  expressly makings. 350of the Code applicable  to	 the
proceedings,  before  a special Judge.	The  amendment	came
long  after the decision of the case by S. Jagjit Singh	 and
had  not expressly been made retrospective.  It was said  on
behalf of the respondent, the prosecutor, that the amendment
being	'in   a	  procedural   provision   was	 necessarily
retrospective, and, therefore, no exception can now be taken
to  the action taken by S. Jagjit Singh. Assuming  that	 the
rule contained ins.	 350of the Code is only a rule  of
procedure,  all that would follow would be that it would  be
presumed to apply to all actions pending as well as future :
Kimbray v. Draper (1).	Such a retrospective operation	does
not assist the respondent's contention.
Nor do we think it an argument against sending the case back
for  retrial  that the special Judge now  hearing  the	case
would be entitled to proceed on the evidence recorded by  S.
Narinder  Singh in view of the amendment.  Whether he  would
be  entitled  to do so or not would depend  on	whether	 the
amended Act would apply to proceedings commenced before	 the
amendment.  It has to be noted that the impugned part of the
proceedings  was  concluded before the amendment.   On	this
question, we do not propose to express any opinion.  In	 any
event, unders. 350as it now stands a succeeding magistrate
(1)  [1868] 3 Q.B. 100.338liar,  power to resummon and examine a witness further.	  We
cannot	speculate what the special Judge who tries the	case
afresh	will  think fit to do ifs. 350of the Code  is	 now
applicable  to	the proceedings before him.  For  all  these
considerations,	 we think it fit to send the case  back	 for
retrial.We therefore, allow the appeal and set aside the  conviction
of  the appellant and the sentence passed on him.  The	case
will now go back for retrial According to law.
Appeal allowed