Take notes as you read a judgment using ourVirtual Legal Assistantand get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out ourPremium Memberservices --Free for one month.Supreme Court of IndiaSociete De Traction Et D vs Kamani Engineering Company Ltd on 18 April, 1963Equivalent citations: 1964 AIR  558, 1964 SCR  (3) 116Author: S C.Bench: Bhagwati, P.N. (Cj), Wanchoo, K.N., Gupta, K.C. Das, Shah, J.C., Ayyangar, N. RajagopalaPETITIONER:
SOCIETE DE TRACTION ET D'ELECTRICITE SOCIETE ANONYME

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
KAMANI ENGINEERING COMPANY LTD.

DATE OF JUDGMENT:
18/04/1963

BENCH:
SHAH, J.C.
BENCH:
SHAH, J.C.
BHAGWATI, P.N. (CJ)
WANCHOO, K.N.
GUPTA, K.C. DAS
AYYANGAR, N. RAJAGOPALA

CITATION:
 1964 AIR  558		  1964 SCR  (3) 116


ACT:
Arbitration--Agreement	between	 company  registered   underIndian	Companies Actand a Foreign compny to refer  dispute
to arbitration in accordance with the rules of International
Chamber	  of  Commerce--Indian	Company	 flies	civil	suit
disregarding   the  arbitrarion	  clause--Foreign    Company
applies	 for  stay of proceedings--Whether the agreement  to
refer to arbitration though  a machinery outsideIndian Actvalid  and enforceable--Companies Act, 1956 (I of 1956),ss.
389,494(b)--Arbitration Act1940 (X of 1940)ss. 34,46,47--Arbitration	 (Protocol and Convention) Act, 1937 (VI  of
1937),s. 3.



HEADNOTE:
    The	 appellant is a corporation incorporated  under	 the
laws  of Belguim and carries on	 business in Brussels.	 The
respondent  is a company registered underIndian  Companies
Act,  1913.  On April 22, 1959, the respondent entered	into
an agreement with the appellant whereby the latter undertook
to   provide   to  the	former	technical   assistance	 for
construction   works.  The  agreement	 contained	  an
arbitration  clause  by which the parties  agreed  to  refer
"all  disputes arising in connection  with this	  agreement"
"under	 the  Rules  of Conciliation and Arbitration of	 the
International Chamber of Commerce."  In	 1961 the respondent
instituted a suit on the Original Side of the High Court  of
Bombay	praying for various reliefs against  the  appellant.
There.upon the appellant took out a notice of motion for  an
order  staying the proceedings in the suit persuant tos.  3of  the	 Arbitration (Protocol and  Convention)	 Act,  1937,
and/or	unders. 34of the.Arbitration Act,  1940,  and/or
under s. 151 of the COde of Civil Procedure, 1908.  The High
Court  refused	the motion one ground that  the	 arbitration
clause	of  the agreement was invalid, for  it	obliged	 the
appellant,  contrary  tos. 3.89  of theIndian  Companies
Act, 1956, to go to arbitration otherwise than in accordance
with  theArbitration ActX of 1940.. The present appeal  is
by way of a certificate granted by the High Court.
117
    In the appeal it was urged thats. 389of the  Companies
Act was an enabling provision and did  not compel an  Indian
Company to agree to refer differences to arbitration only in
accordance  with  the provisions of theIndian	 Arbitration
Act.   If  the	company	 desired  to  refer  a	dispute	  to
arbitration under theArbitration Actit might do so but the
power  to  submit to arbitration being an  incident  to	 the
power  to enter into a contract for the purpose of  carrying
on  its business, was unrestricted and that sub-s. (3) ofs.
389applied   not  to consensual arbitration  but  only  to
statutory   arbitration in pursuance of the  companies	Act,
i.e.   arbitration  unders. 494(b) of theCompanies	Act,
1956.
    Held  thats. 389of the Indian Companies Act, 1956,  is
intended to provide that all arbitration to which a  company
is  a  party  shall  be conducted  in  accordance  with	 the
provisions of theIndian Arbitration ActX of 1940.Section
389(1) of theCompanies Act, 1956, regulates the power  of
the   Indian  Company  to  agree  to  submit   disputes	  to
arbitration and by sub s. (3) ofs. 389the Arbitration	 Act
applies to all arbitrations to which an Indian Company is  a
party.
    Buts.  47of the Arbitration Act, 1940, is as  much  a
part  of theIndian Arbitration Actas any  other  provision
and  that section makes the provisions of  theArbitration
Actapplicable to all arbitrations and to  all	 proceedings
thereunder but subject to the provisions ofs. 46and in  so
far  as is otherwise provided by any law for the time  being
in   force.  By the use of the words "save in so far  as  is
otherwise  provided by any law for the time being  in  force
the  Legislature  has  clearly made the	 provisions  of	 the
Arbitration  (Protocol and Convention) Act, 1937  applicable
to  consensual arbitration under theArbitration  Act,	1940
when  the conditions prescribed for application of that	 Act
are attracted, even if the scheme of arbitration  recognized
thereby is inconsistent withss. 3to38of the	 Arbitration
Act,  1940.  Arbitration according to the provisions of	 the
Arbitration  (Protocol	and  Convention)  Act,	1937   being
recognized  by	theArbitration Act, 1940, an  agreement  to
refer	disputes  in  accordance  with	the  rules  of	 the
International  Chamber of Commerce is not inconsistent	with
s. 389 of theCompanies Act, 1956.
    Societe   Italians	 per  Lavori   Merittimi   v.	Hind
Constructions  Ltd.,  Bombay High Court	 Appeal	 No.  63/59,
dated 22-9-60, Balmukand v. Punjab National Bank  Ltd.Ambala
City,  (1936) I.L.R. 17 Lah. 722 F.B., Jhirighat Native	 Tea
Company Ltd. v. Bipul chand Gupta, I.L.R. (1940) 1 Cal. 358,
East Bengal
118Bank Ltd. v. Jogesh Chandra Banerji I.L.R. (1940)2 Gal.	 237
andThe Catholic Bank Ltd., Mangalore v. F.P.S.	 Albuquerque
I.L.R. (1944) Mad. 385 F.B.



JUDGMENT:CIVIL  APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal No. 196  of
1963.Appeal  from  the judgment and  decree  dated  November,
15/16,	1962, of the Bombay High Court in Appeal No.  32  of
1962.M.C.  Setalvad, M.R. Parpia, J.P.  Thacker,	 O.C.Mathur,
J.B. Dadachanji and Ravinder Narain, for the appellant.
    S.T.  Desai, Tanubhai D. Desai and I.N. Shroff, for	 the
respondent.1963. April 18.  The Judgment of the Court was delivered
by
    SHAH  J.--The question which fails to be  determined  in
this  appeal with certificate granted by the High  Court  of
Bombay	against	 an order refusing a motion for	 stay  of  a
suit, is:"Whether	an  agreement  to  refer  a   future
	      dispute to arbitration according to the  rules
	      of  the  International  Chamber  of   Commerce
	      between  a   Company  registered	 under	 theIndian  Companies	 Actand  a  foreigner	  is
	      binding upon the former."The  facts which give rise to this question are  these:Societe	   De	 Traction    Et	   D'Electricite     Societe
Anonyme--hereinafter  called,  for  the	 sake  of   brevity,
"Traction"--is a Corporation incorporated under the laws  of
Belgium	  and	carries	 on  business  as   consulting	 and
construction  engineers	 at Brussels.  The respondent Kamani
Engineering Corporation Ltd--119hereinafter  called 'Kamani'--is a company registered  under
theIndian Companies Act, 1913.	 Kamani carries on business,
amongst	 others,  as an engineering concern.  On  April	 22,
1959  Kamani  entered into a 'Colloboration  agreement	with
Traction  whereby the latter undertook to provide to  Kamani
technical  assistance  for  the	 construction  of   overhead
railway	 electrification, tramway systems and trolley  buses
in  India,  Burma,  Ceylon  and/or  Nepal.   The   agreement
contained  an  arbitration  clause  in	Articles  X,   which
provided:"All disputes arising in connection with	this
	      agreement	 during the period of the  agreement
	      or  thereafter shall be finally settled  under
	      the  Rules of Conciliation and Arbitration  of
	      the  International Chamber of Commerce by	 one
	      or  more arbitrators appointed  in  accordance
	      with   the  Rules of the	said   International
	      Chamber of Commerce."On September 1, 1961, Kamani instituted suit No. 296  of
1961  in  the  High Court of Judicature	 at  Bombay  on	 its
original side, inter aria, for--(1)	a decree  declaring   that  Traction
	      had   committed	diverse	 breaches   of	 the
	      'Collaboration  agreement' and the   agreement
	      was  on that account terminated  by  Traction,
	      and  Kamani  stood  discharged  from  all	 its
	      obligations thereunder;(2)  a  decree for accounts of  the  items
	      contained	 in  the  invoice  referred  to	  in
	      paragraphs  24  and 25 of the plaint  and	 for
	      ascertainment  of the amount in the  light  of
	      the contentions and submissions set out;(3)	for a decree directing	Traction  to
	      pay	    Its.  9,00,000/-  together	with
	      interest120thereon at the rate of six per cent per  annum
	      from the date of the suit; and
		 (4) for the aforesaid purposes for an order
	      that  all	  enquiries  be	  made,	  directions
	      given,   orders	passed	and   Traction	  be
	      directed to hand over to Kamani all documents,
	      files,  reports, correspondence etc.,  removed
	      by the representatives of the Traction.On	January	 22,  1962  Traction took out  a  notice  of
motion	for  an "order staying the proceedings in  the	suit
pursuant   tos.  3of  the  Arbitration   (Protocol	 and
Convention)  Act, 1937, and/ors. 34of the Arbitration Act,
1940  and/or  s. 151 of the Code of  Civil  Procedure,	1908
and/or	the  inherent  powers of the  High  Court";  in	 the
alternative  for  an  order that Kamani,  its  servants	 and
agents be restrained by an order and injunction from in	 any
manner	proceeding further with or from taking	any  further
steps  in the suit.  Kantawalla, J. refused the	 motion	 and
the order passed by him was confirmed in appeal by the	High
Court.	The  High Court held that the arbitration clause  of
the collaboration agreement  was invalid,  for	it   obliged
Kamani,	 contrary  tos. 389of the  Indian  Companies	Act,
1956, to go to arbitration otherwise than in accordance with
theArbitration ActX of 1940.The	 relevant  rules  of the  International	 Chamber  of
Commerce may  be summarised.Article  7provides by  cl.(1)
that  the  Court  of  Arbitration  does	 not  itself  settle
disputes  except when  otherwise stipulated: it appoints  or
confirms  the nomination of arbitrators in  accordance	with
the provisions following.  If the parties have agreed to the
settlement  of	a  dispute by a	 sole  arbitrator  they	 may
nominate  him  by common agreement for confirmation  by	 the
Court of ArbitratiOn, failing agreement between the121parties the arbitrator	shall be  appointed by the Court  of
Arbitration.   If  reference be to  three  arbitrators	each
party  shall nominate an arbitrator for confirmation of	 the
Court	of  Arbitration	 which	shall  appoint	 the   third
arbitrator.   If the parties fail to agree on the number  of
arbitrators  the Court of Arbitration shall appoint  a	sole
arbitrator  who	 shall	choose	the  National  Committee  or
Committees  from  which it shall request  nominations.	 The
sole arbitrators and third arbitrators must be nationals  of
countries other than those of the parties.  If any challenge
be  made  by  one of the parties to the	 appointment  of  an
arbitrator,  the decision of the Court of Arbitration  which
is  the	 sole Judge of the grounds of  challenge,  shall  be
final.	 On the death or refusal of an arbitrator  to  carry
out   his  duties,  or	on  resignation,   the	 Court.	  of
Arbitration   if  it appointed him, shall  nominate  another
arbitrator in his place.Article 8deals with initiation of
arbitration  proceedings.   ByArt. 13it is  provided	that
when   the  parties  agree  to	submit	their  disputes	  to
arbitration  by the International Chamber of Commerce,	they
shall be deemed to submit to arbitration in accordance	with
the  Rules and if a party raises a plea as to the  existence
or  validity  of the arbitration  clause, if  the  Court  of
Arbitration is satisfied as to the prima facie existence  of
such a clause, it may without prejudice to the admissibility
or the merits of such plea, order that the arbitration shall
proceed.Article 16prescribes the procedure to be  followed
in  the	 arbitration  proceeding.  The rules  by  which	 the
arbitration proceedings shall be governed shall be the rules
of the Chamber and, in the event of there being no provision
in those Rules, those of the law of procedure chosen by	 the
parties	 or,  failing such choice, those of the law  of	 the
country in which the arbitrator holds the proceedings  shall
govern	the proceeding.	 ByArt. 18the	 proceedings  before
the  arbitrator are to take place in the country  determined
by the Court of Arbitration, unless the parties122have  agreed  in  advance upon	the  place  of	arbitration.Article	  19deals  with   the	  arbitrator's	 terms	  of
reference.   The arbitrator is required, before	 hearing  of
the  case  commences,	to draw up in the  presence  of	 the
parties	 a  statement  .defining  his  terms  of   reference
including  the	names and addresses of	the  parties,  brief
statement of the claims of the parties, terms of  reference,
statement of the case, indication of the points at issue  to
be determined, the place of arbitration proceeding, and	 all
other  matters	in order that the award when made  shall  be
enforceable at law, or which in the opinion of the Court  of
Arbitration and the arbitrator, it is desirable to  specify.Article	 9.0deals  with the hearing of. the  case  by	 the
arbitrator   andArt.	21specifies  the  powers  of	 the
arbitrator.   The  arbitrator  is competent  to	 decide	 the
dispute	 on the basis of the relevant documents, unless	 one
of  the	 parties  requests that a  hearing  be	given.	 The
arbitrator  may suo motu, or on the request of the  parties,
summon the parties to appear before him at a specified place
and time and if the parties or any of them having been	duly
summoned, fail to appear before the arbitrator he may, after
satisfying himself that the summons was duly served upon the
party  or  parties, proceed with the arbitration  ex  parte.Article	 23provides that the award shall  be	made  within
sixty  days  from the date on which  the  signed  statements
underArticle 19are submitted, but time may be extended  by
the  Court  of	Arbitration.Article	25deals  with	 the
decision  regarding the costs of  arbitration,	arbitrator's
fee  and  the  administrative  costs.	ByArticle  26the
arbitrator  has	 before completing the award to	 submit	 the
same to the Court of Arbitration.  The Court of	 Arbitration
may  lay  down modifications as to its form and if  need  be
draw  the  arbitrator's attention even to  points  connected
with  the merits of the case. and no award shall  under	 any
circumstances be issued until approved as to its form by the
Court of Arbitration.. Articles 27 and 28 deal with the123pronouncement and notification of the award. ByArt. 28the
award is made final, it being undertaken by the parties that
the  award shall be carried out without delay,	the  parties
having	waived their right to any form of appeal, in so	 far
as  such  waiver  may be valid.	 ByArt.  30the  award  is
required  to be deposited with the Secretariat of the  Court
of  Arbitration.  This is followed by a general	 rule  which
states that in circumstances not specifically provided	for,
the  Court of  Arbitration and the arbitrator shall  act  on
the  basis of the rules and make their best efforts for	 the
award to be enforceable at law.The scheme of arbitration contemplated by these Rules is
different from the scheme contemplated byss. 3to38of the
Arbitration  Act.   Some of the striking provisions  of	 the
Rules  are the power of the Court of Arbitration to  appoint
arbitrators  or umpires, finality of the award	without	 any
provision  for resort to the Civil Court to remit or to	 set
aside the award even for misconduct of the arbitrator or  an
error  apparent on the face of the award, and the  power  of
the  Court  of Arbitration to modify the award and  to	give
directions during the course of proceedings for arbitration,
and similar provisions.Kamani  is,	 as already stated,  a	 company  registered
under  theIndian Companies Actof 1913 and bys. 3(1)  of
the  Indian  Companies,	 Act 1956,is  a	 'Company'  for	 the
purposes of  that act.Section 389of the Indian  Companies
Act,  1956 (before it' was repealed by Act 65 of 1960)	read
as follows :--"(1)	A company may, by written  agreement
	      refer  to arbitration, in accordance with	 theArbitration Act, 1940 (X of 1940), an existing
	      or  future difference between itself  and	 any
	      other company or person.('2)	A  company which is a  party  to  an
	      arbitration may  delegate to the	arbitrator124power to settle any terms or to determine	 any
	      matter, capable of being lawfully settled	  or
	      determined  by the company itself, or  by	 its
	      Board   of   Directors,	managing   director,
	      managing agent, secretaries and treasurers, or
	      manager.(3)  The provisions of theArbitration Act,
	      1940   (X	 of  1940),  shall  apply   to	 all
	      arbitrations m pursuance of this Act to  which
	      a company is a party."The	 High  Court  held that	 an  Indian  Company  could,
because	 ofs.	 389refer an  existing	 or  future  dispute
between	  itself  and  any  other  company  or	 person	  to
arbitration  only  in accordance with theArbitration	Act,
1940 and not otherwise; that any arbitration agreement which
obliged	  the  Company	to  submit  itself  to	 arbitration
according  to  a scheme of arbitration	different  from	 theArbitration  Act, 1940 would not be binding upon the  Indian
Company,  and  therefore the Court had no power	 to  enforce
compliance  with an invalid covenant, and to stay  the	suit
instituted  by	 an Indian company in  breach  thereof.	  In
recording that	conclusion the	High Court was guided by its
earlier judgment in Societe Italians per Lavori Marittimi v.
Hind Constructions Ltd. (1), that it was not permissible  to
a  Company  incorporated under theIndian Companies  Actto
refer  disputes to arbitration otherwise than in  accordance
with theArbitration Act.In support of the appeal Mr. Setalvad contended thats.
389is an enabling provision and does not compel an  Indian
Company to agree to refer differences to arbitration only in
accordance  with  the provisions of theIndian	 Arbitration
Act, 1940 i.e. if the Company desires to refer a dispute  to
arbitration  under theArbitration Act, 1940, it may do	 so,
but the power to submit to arbitration being an
  (1)  Appeal No. 63 of 1959 decided on September 22,  1960.
(Unreported.)125incident  of  the  power to enter  into	 contracts  for	 the
purpose	 of carrying on its business, is  unrestricted,	 and
that  sub-s.  (3)  ofs.  389applies	 not  to  consensual
arbitrations but only to statutory arbitrations in parsuance
of theCompanies Act, e.g. arbitrations unders. 494(3) (b)
of the companies Act 1956.It	cannot	be disputed that the use of  the  expression
'may'  is not decisive.	 Having regard to the  context,	 the
expression 'may' used in a statute has varying significance.
In some contexts it is purely permissive, in others, it	 may
confer	a  power  and make it  obligatory  upon	 the  person
invested with the, power to exercise it as laid down.
    A company under theIndian Companies Actis entitled  to
enter  into  contracts for all such purposes as are  by	 its
constitution  within its competence.  It is invested with  a
legal personality, and a commercial company  may subject  to
restrictions specifically imposed upon it by its  memorandum
or Articles, always enter into contracts for the purpose  of
its  business subject in the matter of form tos. 46of	 the
Companies Act.	An arbitration agreement being a contract to
submit	present or future  differences between	the  parties
not to the  ordinary courts but before a tribunal chosen  by
the  parties, if  the company has the power to enter into  a
contract,.  that  power	 would include	power  to  submit  a
dispute to arbitration out of court.  Bys. 28of the Indian
Contract   Act	  agreements   in   restraint	 of    legal
proceedings  are declared void, subject however to the	rule
that a contract by which two or more persons agree that	 any
dispute which  has arisen or which may arise between them in
respect	 of  any  subject  or class  of	 subjects  shall  be
referred to arbitration, is not illegal.Section 389of the
Companies Act, 1956 therefore, does not confer any new right
upon Companies to agree to refer disputes which have  arisen
or which may arise to	arbitration: the126section	  recognises  the  rights  of  a  company  to  refer
present	 disputes to arbitration, and seeks to regulate	 the
right  by  placing a restriction upon the exercise  of	that
right.	 It  is pertinent to remember that  theArbitration
Act,  1940  is	in  form  a code  relating  to	the  law  of
arbitration  and applies to all arbitrations: it applies  to
all  arbitrations  to which persons natural  and  legal	 are
parties.   The	power  of  the	Company	 to  enter  into  an
arbitration  agreement	is therefore not conferred  for	 the
first  time by theCompanies Act; it is merely regulated  by
s.  389 of theCompanies Act.  In other .words,	  a  company
within	the meaning of theIndian  Companies Act,  1956	 has
the   power   to  refer	 present  or  future   disputes	  to
arbitration, but such reference has because of the statutory
provision   to	be in accordance with theArbitration	Act,
1940.  Sub-section (3) ofs. 389makes	the  provisions	  of
theArbitration Act,applicable to all  arbitrations  to
which a company is a party, provided they are in   pursuance
of theCompanies Act.  There is no  warrant for holding that
sub-s.(3)  is  independent of sub-s.  (1).   Subsection	 (1)
affirms the power of a company to refer differences  between
it  and	 another  company or person, and also regulates	 it.
Sub-section (3) makes the provisions of theArbitration	 Actapplicable  to	all  arbitrations to which a  company  is  a
party:	it is not restricted to mere statutory	arbitrations
to  which  a company is obliged to submit by virtue  of	 the
provisions of theCompanies Act.  To invest sub-s. (3)	with
a  restricted meaning, is to  make it redundant.   The	only
provision of theCompanies Actwhich compels a company to go
to  arbitration in respect of a dispute iss. 494(3)	(b).
By  that  clause  a  member  of	 a  transferor	 company  in
voluntary   liquidation	  expressing  dissent	against	  an
arrangement  relating to the acceptance of shares,  policies
or  other  interest  or	 participation	in  profits  in	 the
transferee  company in consideration of the business of	 the
former may require the liquidator127to  purchase  his interest at a price to  be  determined  by
agreement  or  by arbitration  in the manner provided bys.
494,  and sub-s. (6) expressly makes the provisions  of	 theArbitration  Actapplicable to such arbitration.  It may  be
observed  that the words "other than those  restricting	 the
application  of	 that Act" in sub-s. (6)  have	no  meaning.
They  have been merely copied froms. 208Cof the  Companies
Act of 1913, in which they  survived by	 some  inadvertance,
even  after the repeal of theArbitration Actof 1899.	 Our
attention has not been invited to any other provisions under
theIndian Companies Actunder which compulsory	 arbitration
has  to be undertaken between a company and another  company
or person and in regard	 to which  no provision relating  to
the applicability of theArbitration Acthas expressly	been
made.	The   provisions  relating, to	arbitration  in	 the
earlierCompanies  Actalso	confirm	  that	  view.	   A
retrospect   of legislation relating to arbitration  in	 the
context of the law relating to Companies would serve also in
clearing the ground in appreciating the reasons which led to
conflicting decisions in the High Courts.
    It may not be necessary to enter upon  a detailed review
of the Regulations and Acts in force prior to the year 1882.
It  may	  be sufficient to observe that	 in  the  Presidency
towns  of  Calcutta, Madras and Bombay	there  were  diverse
Regulations in operation which	provided  for machinery	 for
amicable   settlement  of  disputes  of	 civil	 nature	  by
arbitration.   For  the first time by Act 8 of 1859  in	 the
Code  of Civil Procedure a provision was made for  reference
of disputes to arbitration by parties to the  suit  applying
to  the	 Court in which	 the suit was pending in  which	 the
matter	was referred to arbitration.  Then came	 theIndian
Contract  Act9 of 1879,, which recognized the	validity  of
contracts  requiring  parties  to  submit   their   disputes
either present or future to arbitration.  In 1822 the Indian128Companies  Act6 of 1882 was enacted which byss. 96to123made provisions for arbitration out of Court, of disputes in
which  companies were concerned.  A company could  refer  by
writing	 under	its  common seal any  matter  whatsoever  in
dispute between itself and any other company or person,	 and
the  procedure	prescribed in those sections  applied.	This
group of sections  dealt  exhaustively with arbitrations out
of court to which a company was a party. Beside enacting the
procedure for arbitration it provided that the award of	 the
arbitrator  was not liable to be set aside on any ground  of
irregularity  or  informality.	On  the application  of	 any
party interested the arbitration agreement could be filed in
the  High  Court  having  jurisdiction,	 and  an  order	  of
reference could be made thereon.  Immediately in the wake of
theCompanies Act, 1882 the Code of Civil Procedure (Act  14
of  1882)  was	enacted which provided	by  Ch.	 XXXVII	 the
general	 law relating to  arbitration.'Sections 506to522dealt  with  arbitration  in a pending	suit.	If  all	 the
parties	 to  a suit desired that any  matter  in  difference
between	 them in the suit be referred to  arbitration,	they
could, at any time before judgment was pronounced, apply  to
the  Court for an order of reference.  Bys.  523provision
was made enabling the parties to an arbitration agreement to
file  it  in  Court and the Court if  satisfied	 as  to	 the
existence   of	the  arbitration  agreement  could  make   a
reference  to  the arbitrator appointed by  the	 parties  or
nominated  by  the  Court and  the  provisions	relating  to
arbitration  in	 the  earlier sections in  so  far  as	they
related	 to or were consistent with the agreement   applied.Section 525enabled any person interested in the award	made
in   a	 matter	 referred  to	 arbitration   without	 the
intervention of a Court of Justice to file the same in Court
and  if no ground for setting aside the award was made	out,
the Court could order that the same be filed. Chapter XXXVII
therefore  dealt with arbitration generally--arbitration  in
pending proceedings,129arbitrations  pursuant	to   orders  passed   by  the  Court
referring  a  dispute on an agreement filed  in	 Court,	 and
filing	of  awards made by arbitrators	appointed  by  valid
agreements out of Court.  The combined effect of theIndian
Companies  Actss.  96	 to 123,   and	the  Code  of  Civil
Procedure ss.506 to 526 was that where a Company was a party
to an arbitration out of Court, the arbitration	 proceedings
had  to take place in accordance with theCompanies Actand
could be enforced in the manner provided thereunder.  Filing
of an arbitration agreement in Court for reference was	also
governed by theCompanies Act, but arbitration in a  pending
suit to which a Company was a party was governed by the Code
of Civil Procedure.In	 1899  the Indian Legislature  enacted	theIndian-
Arbitration  Act,  9  of  1899.That	Acthad  a  limited
operation.   Bys. 2it was provided' that it	shall  apply
only  in  cases	 where if  the	subjectmatter  submitted  to
arbitration  were  the subject of a suit,  the	suit  could,
whether	  with	leave  or  otherwise  be  instituted  in   a
Presidency-town.   By the proviso it was open to  the  Local
Government,  to declare the Act 'applicable in	other  local
area  as if it were a Presidency-town.	Bys. 3proviso	 (2)
it  was provided that' nothing in the Act shall	 affect	 the
provisions  of	theIndian Companies Act, 1882	relating  to
arbitration.   The provisions of theIndian  Companies	Act,
1882   contained  inss. 96to123therefore  continued'  to
remain	 in   operation	  and	to   apply   to	   companies
notwithstanding the enactment of theIndian Arbitration Act,
1899.  The Civil Procedure Code of 1882 was repealed by	 Act
5  of  1908  and  the  provisions  relating  to	 arbitration
substantially  on  the same pattern as in the Code  of	1882
were  incorporated in a separate schedule in the  new  Code.
Clauses 1 to 16 dealt with references to arbitration of	 the
differences between the parties to a suit if they-applied in
writing in that behalf.131Clauses	 17  to	 19  dealt  with  orders  of  references  on
agreements  to refer disputes to arbitration and clauses  20
and  "1	 dealt with the tiling and  enforcement	 of  awards.Section 89was specially enacted in the, Code which provided
by the first sub-section:"(1)  Save in so far as is otherwise  provided
	      by theIndian Arbitration Act, 1899, or by any
	      other  law  for the time being in	 force,	 all
	      references to arbitration whether by an  order
	      in  a suit or otherwise,	and all	 proceedings
	      thereunder,   shall   be	governed    by	 the
	      provisions contained in the Second Schedule."The  effect  ofs.  89was  to	 make  the  Second  Schedule
applicable to all arbitrations other than those governed  by
theIndian  Arbitration  Act,	 1899 or any other  law	 for
the time being in force.  Therefore since the enactment	 of'
the  Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 all arbitrations  out  of
Court where a company was a party had to be conducted in the
manner provided by theCompanies Act,  1882 but arbitrations
during the pendency of a suit or references to	arbitrations
by  filing an arbitration agreement could be made under	 the
appropriate  clauses  of the Code of Civil  procedure.The
Indian Companies Act, 1882 was repealed by theCompanies Act7 of 1913. Bys. 290of that  Act read	with Schedule IV the
Indian Companies Act of 1882 and the second proviso tos.  3of  the	 Indian Arbitration Act, 1899 were,  repealed.The
Indian	Companies  Act, 1913incorporated a newsection	 152which  by the first clause authorised a company	 by  written
agreement  to  refer to arbitration, m accordance  with	 theIndian	 Arbitration  Act,  1899,  an  existing	 or   future
difference  between itself and any other company or  person,
and  by the third subsection enacted that the provisions  of
theIndian  Arbitration  Act,	 1899,	other  than   those.
restricting  the  application of the Act in respect  of	 the
subject-matter	of  the	 arbitration,  shall  apply  to	 all
arbitrations between companies and persons in pur-131suance	of theCompanies Act.  The arbitrations to  which  a
company was a party had therefore tO take place irrespective
of  the restrictions contained	ins. 2of  the	 Arbitration
Act,  1899, according to the provisions of  theArbitration
Act,  1899.Section 214of the Companies Act,	1913  (which
was  later renumbereds. 208Cby Act XXII  of  1936)provided
for compulsory arbitration for purchasing the interest of  a
member	of  a  Company in  voluntary  liquidation  when	 the
business  of  the company was agreed to	 be  transferred  to
another	 company  in  the  course  of  liquidation  and	 the
liquidator  and the member could not agree as to  the  price
payable	 in respect thereof. By cl. (6) of that	 section  it
was   expressly	  provided  that  the  provisions   of	 theArbitration  Act,  1899, other than  those  restricting	 the
application of that Act 'in respect of the subject-matter of
the   arbitration,  shall  apply  to  all  arbitrations	  in
pursuance ofs. 214.The  Government	 of  India was a party to  the	Protocol  on
Arbitration  Clauses and the Convention on the Execution  of
Foreign	 Arbitral  Awards.  To	enforce the  terms   of	 the
Protocol,  the Indian Legislature enacted the	 Arbitration
(Protocol and Convention) Act, 6 of    1937 for	 enforcement
of  foreign  awards  on	 differences  relating	to   matters
considered,.,  as  commercial  under the  law  in  force  in
British	 India in pursuance of an arbitration  agreement  to
which the Protocol set. forth in the First Schedule applied,
between persons who were subject to the .jurisdiction of the
powers	notified by the Governor-General in  that behalf  as
parties	 to  the Convention.  Bys. 3of , that Act  it	 was
provided that:"Notwithstanding	anything  contained  in	 theIndian  Arbitration Act, 1899, or in the	Code
	      of  Civil Procedure, 1908, if any party  to  a
	      submission  made in pursuance of an  agreement
	      to. which the Protocol set forth in the  First
	      Schedule	 as  modified  by  the	 reservation
	      subject  to  Which  it  was  signed  by  India
	      applies, Or any132person claiming through or under him,  commen-
	      ces any legal proceedings in any Court against
	      any  other  party	 to the	 submission  or	 any
	      person  claiming	through	 or  under  him	  in
	      respect  of any matter agreed to be  referred,
	      any  party to such legal proceedings  may,  at
	      any time after  appearance and before filing a
	      written statement or taking any other steps in
	      the  proceedings, apply to the Court  to	stay
	      the   proceedings;  and  the   Court,   unless
	      satisfied	 that the agreement  of	 arbitration
	      has  become inoperative or cannot proceed,  or
	      that  there is not m fact any dispute  between
	      the  parties with regard to the matter  agreed
	      to  be referred, shall make an  order  staying
	      the proceedings."By this enactment an obligation in the conditions set out in
s.  3  was imposed upon the Court, unless it  was  satisfied
that the agreement of arbitration had become inoperative  or
could  not  proceed, to direct that the suit  filed  in	 any
Court  in  India against any other party to  the  submission
shall	be   stayed.   This  provision	 applied   to	 all
arbitration  agreements whether a company was or was  not  a
party thereto.This  Actwas  followed by theArbitration Act,  X  of
1940.The Actwas enacted in the form of a complete code on
the law of arbitration in India. All consensual arbitrations
were   governed	 by  theArbitration Actand bys.  46the
provisions  of the Act, except sub-s (1) ofs. 6andss.  7,12,36and37were made applicable  to  every	 arbitration
under any other enactment for the time being in force, as if
the  arbitration were pursuant to an arbitration  agreement,
and   as  if  that  other  enactment  were  an	 arbitration
agreement,  except in so far as the Act was consistent	with
that other enactment or with any rules made thereunder.	  By
s. 47 it was provided that:"Subject to the provisions ofsection 46,	 and
	      save  in so far as is otherwise.	provided  by
	      any133law   for	 the  time  being  in	force,	 the
	      provisions  of  this Act shall  apply  to	 all
	      arbitrations    and   to	  all	 proceedings
	      thereunder.Provided	that  an arbitration  award  other-'
	      wise  obtained  may  with the consent  of	 all
	      parties interested be taken into consideration
	      as a compromise or adjustment of a suit by any
	      Court before which the suit is pending."Bys. 49read with the Fourth'Schedule the figure "1899"  in
s.   152(1.)   &  (3)  in  theCompanies  Act,	  1913	 was
substituted'by the figure "1940" and the words in sub-s. (3)
"other than those restricting the application of the Act  in
respect	 of  the  subject-matter of  the  arbitration"	were
deleted.   So also s. 89 of the Code of Civil Procedure	 was
deleted.   The	effect	of this amendment was  to  make	 theArbitration Actapplicable to all arbitrations in  pursuance
of theCompanies Act,  1913 in which a company was a  party.
No amendment, however, was made in the Arbitration (Protocol
and Convention) Act, 6 of 1937 and none such was  necessary.
By  virtue of the saving clause ins. 47the  provisions  of
the   Arbitration  (Protocol  and  Convention)	 Act,	1937
continued to operate.The	 Indian Companies  Act,	 7 of 1913 was	repealed  by
theCompanies ActI of 1956 ands. 389took the place  ofs.
152of	 the former Act with a slight  modification.Under
the Arbitration Act, 1899  read	 with  theCompanies	Act,
1913,  the  power of a	company to   refer   differences  to
arbitration  fell  to be determined in certain	cases  which
arose,	before	the High  Courts of   Lahore,  Calcutta	 and
Madras.	 In sita Ram Balmukand v. The Punjab  National	Bank
Ltd.  Ambala City (1), there was a private arbitration in  a
dispute	 between the Punjab National Bank Ltd. and a  debtor
of  the Bank and the arbitrator made his award in favour  of
the  Bank.  This award was filed in the Court
(1) (1956) I. L. R., 17 Lah. 722 F. B134of  the Senior Subordinate Judge, Ambala under Sch.   I	  of
the   Code   of	  Civil Procedure, 1908	 and  a	 decree	 was
obtained   in  accordance  with	 the  provisions  of	that
Schedule.  Execution was then taken out and property of	 the
debtor was attached. The debtor contended that the award and
the   decree   by   the	  Court	  were	 invalid,    because
arbitration .to which a company was a party had, in view  of
the  provisions	 ofs. 152of the Indian Companies  Act,  to
take  place  in	 accordance  with  the	provisions  of	 theArbitration Act,  1899 and the award could only be filed  in
the  Court of the District Judge and not in the Court of the
Senior	Subordinate Judge and therefore	 the proceedings  in
execution  "were ultra vires".	The High Court held thats.
152of the Indian Companies Act, 1913,	enacted an  enabling
provision  and did not make it obligatory upon	the  parties
one  of	 which	 was  a company, to  go	 to  arbitration  in
accordance with the requirements of theIndian	 Arbitration
Act,  1899.   The provisions ofs. 152in the  view  of	 the
Court  being permissive, the Company could apply to have  an
award  filed in Court under paragraph 21 (1) of Sch.  II  to
the  Code  of Civil Procedure and the decree passed  by	 the
Senior	Subordinate Judge was not a nullity as contended  by
the   debtor.  Bhide, J, who delivered the judgment  of	 the
Court observed that the general policy of the Legislature as
disclosed bys. 152of the Indian Companies  Act,  1913, was
not  to make compliance	 in  arbitration  proceedings	with
the  provisions	 of  theIndian  Arbitration	 Act,  1899,
obligatory  outside  the Presidency-towns  and thats.	 152being  an  enabling provision it merely conferred  power  on
companies to. refer disputes to arbitration under theIndian
Arbitration Act, 1899, by an agreement in writing when	that
course	was  preferred. This view was not  accepted  by	 the
Calcutta  High Court in Jhirighat Native Tea  Company  .Ltd.
v. Bipul Chandra  Gupta (1).  In that case the	jurisdiction
of the District Court to entertain a petition
(1) I.L.R.(1940) 1 Cas.358135under  paragraph-20  of	 Sch.  II  of  the  C:ode  of  Civil
Procedure  for	an order filing an award made out  of  court
where  one  of	the parties to the  dispute  Was  a  company
registered  under  theIndian	 Companies  Act,  1913,	 was
challenged.  It was held by the High Court of Calcutta	that
by  virtue of the provisions ofs. 152sub-ss.	(1) and	 (3)
of theIndian Companies Act, 1913, all arbitrations  between
companies  and persons had to take place in accordance	with
the  provisions	 ofss. 3to22of the	 Indian	 Arbitration
Act,   1899,  and   for	 that purpose,s. 2of	 the  Indian
Arbitration Act	 restricting its local application was to be
treated as non-existent. The Court also	 opined that in view
of  s. 89 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908,	 the  Second
Schedule  to  the  Code had no	application  to	 arbitration
between a .company and a person or to arbitrations unders.
208C:  of theCompanies Act, 1913. It was observed that	 the
words  "in pursuance of this Act" (i. e. theCompanies	Act)
qualified the phrase "shall apply" and therefore the meaning
ofs. 159, was that the provisions of theIndian Arbitration
Act,   1800,  excepts.  2thereof  shall  apply  to	 all
arbitrations between companies and persons  by the force and
effect of theCompanies Actitself.In  East  Bengal  Bank Ltd. v. Jogesh  Chandra	Banerji(1)
Mittar J. modified the second proposition which was somewhat
broadly stated.	 He held that even 'where one party or	both
the  parties  to a suit any companies registered  under	 theIndian Companies Act, arbitration proceedings pendentee lite
between	 them are governed by the second schedule to  the  I
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and not the provisions ofs.
152of the Companies Act, 1918.	 It was pointed out that theIndian	Arbitration  Act, 1899, only .applied to arbitration
by  agreement without intervention of the Court and the	 Act
had  no application to arbitration relating to the  subject-
matter of a pending suit by the force and effect of  s.152
I.L.R. (1940) 2 Cal.237136of  theIndian	 Companies  Act.   The	view  expressed	  in
Jhirighat  Native  Tea Company's Case (1), was	approved  by
the  Madras High Court inThe Catholie Bank  Ltd.  Mangalore
v.F.P.S.  Albuquerque(2). In that case the Court held	that
after  the enactment of.theIndian Companies Act,  1913	 and
before theIndian Arbitration Act, 1940, came into force,  a
company could submit difference. s to arbitration only under
the  provisions	 of theIndian Arbitration  Act,  1899.	 and
consequently Companies were (for the purpose of	 arbitration
out  of court) not governed by Sch. II of the Gode of  Civil
Procedure,    All  these  cases	 arose	under	theIndian
Arbitration  Act, 1899 read with theIndian  Companies	Act,
1913, and the question mooted was  whether  the	 Subordinate
Judge, who was approached on the assumption that Sch.  II of
the Code of Civil Procedure applied, was competent to pass a
decree	on  an award made out of court, or  to	entertain  a
petition for filing such an award.In	1960 the Bombay High Court had occasion to  consider
the effect ofs. 152of the Indian Companies Act 7 of  1913,
in  its	 relation  to the Arbitration - Act  of	 1940.	 The
Court  in  that	 case after referring  to  the	Lahore,	 the
Calcutta  and  the  Madras  decisions  observed	 in  Societe
Italian,s  per Lavori Marittimi v. Hind Constructions	Ltd.
(3), decided by Mudholkar acting  C.J.	and S.	M. Shah,  J,
after referring to the marginal note ofs. 152:"Undoubtedly  a corporation has  powers  which
	      are  incidental  to  the	performance  of	 the
	      objects	for  which  that   corporation	 was
	      established.  It can, therefore, be said	 and
	      properly	be  said that a .power to  carry  on
	      business	implies also an incidental power  to
	      refer a dispute arising from that business  to
	      arbitration.   It was, therefore,	 not at	 all
	      necessary	 to make specific provisions in	 theIndian Companies Actof
(1) I.L.R. (1940) 1 Cal. 358,	(2) I.L.R (1944) Mad. 335  F
B
(3) Appeal No, 63 of 1959 decided on September 22, 1960,137the  kind which we find insection 159. of the
	      Act  of  1913 for enabling  a  corporation  to
	      enter  into an agreement for arbitration.	 The
	      fact  that  the legislature has  enacted	this
	      provision	 would show that the legislature  by
	      enacting	it had no object in view other	than
	      to limit the exercise of that power."The  Court  therefore  held that  an  arbitration  agreement
whereby an Indian Company had agreed to refer future dispute
under a collaboration agreement with an Italian Corporation,
was  unenforceable  by	virtue	ofs.	152of	 the  Indian
Companies Act, and the suit filed by the Indian company	 for
a declaration that the "dredging agreement" had been validly
terminated,  and  for damages for breach  of  contract,	 and
accounts  of profits and tosses could not be ordered  to  be
stayed	either	under. s. 34 ofArbitration Actors.  3of
the   Arbitration (Protocol and Convention) Act,   1937,  or
under s. 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
    On	a  review  of  the  statutory  provisions  and	 the
authorities  we are  of the view thats. 152of	 the  Indian
Companies   Act,  1913,	 ands.	 389ofthe Indian  Companies
Act,   I  of  1956,  were  intended  to	 provide  that	 all
arbitrations  to  which	 a  company  is	 a  party  shall  be
conducted  in  accordance with the provisions of theIndian
Arbitration  Act,  X  of 1940. For  reasons  which  we	have
already	 stateds.  389(1) of theCompanies	Act,   1956,
regulated  the	power	  of Indian Companies  to  agree  to
submit	differences  to arbitration and by  sub-s.  (3)	 the
provisions  of	theArbitration Act, 1940,  applied  to	 all
arbitrations to which an Indian Company was a party.
    That however is not decisive of the question which falls
to be determined  before us.Section 47of the	 Arbitration
Act, 1940,  is as much a part of theIndian Arbitration	 Actas any other provision138and that section makes	the  provisions of   theArbitration
Actapplicable to all arbitrations and to all	 proceedings
thereunder   but  subject   to the provisions ofs.  46and
save  in so far as is otherwise provided by any law for	 the
time  being  in force. We arc not concerned in	the  present
case  with a statutory arbitration.  But by the use  of	 the
words  "save in so far as is otherwise provided by  any	 law
for the time being in force",  the  Legislature has  clearly
made the  provisions  of    the	   Arbitration (Protocol and
Convention)  Act,	1937,	applicable  to	  consensual
arbitrations under  theArbitration Actof 1940 when	 the
conditions  prescribed for the application of that  Act	 are
attracted,  even  if the scheme	 of  arbitration  recognised
thereby is inconsistent withss. 3to38of the	 Arbitration
Act, 1940. The Arbitration (Protocol  and Convention) Act  6
of  1937  was enacted for giving effect to the	protocol  on
arbitration  clauses set forth in the First Schedule and  of
the conventions on the execution of foreign arbitral  awards
set  forth  in	the Second Schedule  and  for  enabling	 the
conventions to become operative in India. It is not disputed
that  the proposed arbitration between Traction	 and  Kamani
under the Rules of the International Chamber of Commerce  is
governed by the Protocol on Arbitration Clauses agreed to at
Geneva.	 on September 24-,  1923,  and the Protocol in	 the
First  Schedule	  applies.  The	 Arbitration  (Protocol	 and
Convention)  Act 6 of 1937, being a law otherwise  providing
for arbitration the provisions thereof would by virtue ofs.
47be	 applicable  to arbitrations unders.	389of	 the
Indian	Companies  Act, 1956, if  the  conditions  regarding
their  applicability  are  fulfilled.That  Actapplies  to
arbitrations   whether	parties	 to  .the  submission	 arc
individuals  or companies.  By virtue ofs. 389sub-ss.	 (1)
and (3) of theIndian Companies Act1 of 1956, (before	that
section	  was	repealed  in  1960)  an Indian	Company	 may
agree  to  refer differences between itself  and  any  other
company or person by written139agreement  in  accordance with theArbitration  Act,	1940
and    the provisions  of  theArbitration Act, 1940  apply
to all Arbitrations in	pursuance of theCompanies   Actto
which	a company is a party.  Arbitration according to	 the
provisions of the Arbitration (Protocol	 and  Convention)Act
6  of  1937  being  recognised by  theArbitration  Actan
agreement to refer disputes in accordance with the rules  of
the  International Chamber of Commerce is  not	inconsistent
withs. 389of the Companies Act, 1956.	 In Societe Italians
per   Lavori   Marittimi's case (1), the  attention  of	 the
Court  was, it appears, not invited to the provisions ofs.
47of	the Arbitration Act, 1940, in its  relation  to	 the
Arbitration (Protocol and Convention) Act 6 of 1937 and	 the
Court	refused	   to	stay  the    action   commenced	  in
contravention  of the  arbitration agreement on the  footing
that   an   arbitration	   agreement	which	contemplated
reference  otherwise  than  in the manner  provided  by	 theArbitration  Act,   1940,ss. 1to38was  inffective	 not
being	permissible  under  the provisions ofs. 152of	 the
Companies Act 1913 and "therefore impossible and  completely
prohibited."   This  view  in  our  judgment,	 cannot	  be
sustained.  In the present case, Kantawala, J. and the	High
Court  proceeded upon the view' (as they were bound  to	 do)
that the decision in Societe Italian per Lavori	 Marittimi's
case (1) was sufficient to justify the contention of  Kamani
that   the  suit  could	 not  be  stayed,  the	 arbitration
agreement   being   inffective	and  invalid.	For  reasons
already set  out by us, that assumption cannot be  supported
Whether	 having	 regard	 to  the  terms	 ofs.	 3of	 the
Arbitration  (Protocol and Convention) Act 6 of	  1937	stay
may  be	 granted  of  the suit commenced  by   Kamani  is  a
question  on  which no decision has  been  recorded  by	 the
Trial  Judge  nor  by the High Court, and  we  will  not  be
justified in this appeal in entering upon questions of	fact
for the first time without having the
(1) Appeal No. 63 of 1959 decided on September 22, 1960.140benefit of the view of the High Court on those questions.
    The appeal will therefore be allowed, and the proceeding
remanded  to  the Court of First Instance to  be  heard	 and
disposed of according to law. Costs in this Court and before
the  Division Bench of the High Court will abide the  result
of the proceeding taken pursuant to this order in the  Trial
Court.Appeal allowed.Case remanded.