Take notes as you read a judgment using ourVirtual Legal Assistantand get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out ourPremium Memberservices --Free for one month.Supreme Court of IndiaState Of Tamil Nadu vs Thirumagal Mills Ltd. Etc on 17 November, 1971Equivalent citations: 1972 AIR 1148, 1972 SCR  (2) 395Author: A GroverBench: Grover, A.N.PETITIONER:
STATE OF TAMIL NADU

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
THIRUMAGAL MILLS LTD.  ETC.

DATE OF JUDGMENT17/11/1971

BENCH:
GROVER, A.N.
BENCH:
GROVER, A.N.
HEGDE, K.S.

CITATION:
 1972 AIR 1148		  1972 SCR  (2) 395
 1972 SCC  (1) 176
 CITATOR INFO :
 RF	    1973 SC1045	 (3)
 F	    1985 SC1748	 (6)


ACT:
Madras	General Sales Tax Act, 1959, s. 2(d) as	 amended  by
Madras	General	 Sales Tax (Second Amendment)  Act,  1964-If
retrospective-- Effect of s. 9.



HEADNOTE:
The  assessee was a spinning mill.  It opened a	 fair  price
shop   to  provide  an	amenity	 to  its  workmen  so	that
commodities  may be made available to them at  fair  prices.
For  the  assessment year 1960-61  the	assessing  authority
under  the Madras General Sales Tax Act, 1959,	included  in
the assessee's turnover the sale value of groceries sold  in
the  fair  price shop.	The Tribunal held in favour  of	 the
assessee  and the High Court, on reference, found  that	 the
assessee  was not carrying on 'business' within the  meaning
of the Act in the fair price shop and confirmed the orders.
In  appeal  to this Court it was contended that	 theSecond
Amendment  Act.	 1964,	substituted  a	new  definition	  of
'business' in the Act, which, read withs. 9of the Act, had
retrospective effect.
Dismissing the appeal,
HELD  :	 Validation  of tax which has been  declared  to  be
illegal	 may  be done only if the ground  of  illegality  or
invalidity  are	 capable of being removed and  are  in	fact
removed.   The	Legislature  can give its  own	meaning	 and
interpretation of law under which the tax was collected	 and
by  legislative flat make the new meaning binding  upon	 the
courts. [399 C-D]
But in the present case, none of the methods for  validating
a  tax	has  been  adopted.   Although	the  definition	  of
'business' was amended it was not made retrospective by	 the
usual  words  that it should be deemed to have	been  always
substituted nor was any other language employed to show that
the substantive provision was being amended retrospectively.
On  the contrary, the definition of the word 'business'	 was
amended only prospectively.  In the absence of retrospective
effect being given to the definition,s.     9was  of	  no
avail to the Revenue. [399E-G]
State of Tamil Nadu v. M. Rayappa Gounder, A.I.R. 1971	S.C.
231,Shri   Prithvi  Cotton  Mills   v.   Broach   Borough
Municipality, [1970] 1 S.C. R. 388; 79 I.T.R. 136, followed.



JUDGMENT:CIVIL  APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Civil Appeals Nos.  1454  of
1969 and 148 of 1971.Appeals by special leave from the judgments and orders dated
April 6, 1967 and January 22, 1969 of the Madras High  Court
in Tax Cases Nos. 152 of 1964, and 300 of 1968 respectively.
S.   T.	 Desai and A. V. Rangam, for the appellant (in	both
the appeals)--L500 Sup.CI/72396K.   Parasaran,	 T. Vadivel, R. Shanmughan and	K.  Jayaram,
for the respondent (in C.A. No. 1454/69).
T.   A.	 Ramachandran,	for  the  respondent  (in  C.A.	 No.
148/71).B Sen, S. P. Mitra and G. S. Chatterjee, for intervener (in
C.A. No. 1454 of 1969).The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
Grover, J. These appeals by special leave from a judgment of
the Madras High Court involve a common question.
The facts in the first of these appeals may be stated.	 The
assessee,  who is the respondent herein, is a spinning	mill
manufacturing  cotton  yarn.  It was assessed to  sales	 tax
under  the Madras General Sales Tax Act,  1959,	 hereinafter
called	the  'Act'.   For the assessment  year	1960-61	 the
assessing authority included in the taxable turnover certain
amounts	 representing  the  sale  value	 of  foodgrains	 and
groceries  sold in the fair price shop run by the mills	 and
the  amount  realised  by sale of articles of  food  in	 the
canteen which was run for its employees.  The assessee filed
an  appeal  questioning its liability to pay  tax  on  these
items  The appellate authority dismissed that  appeal.	 The
assessee  thereupon filed a further appeal to the Sales	 tax
Appellate  Tribunal  which allowed the appeal  and  directed
that the turnover in question be deleted.  The Revenue	went
up  in	revision to the High Court of  Madras.	 A  division
bench of that court dismissed the revision.
The  Appellate Tribunal had found that the fair	 price	shop
and the canteen were run exclusively for the benefit of	 the
employees  and	there was no profit motive  in	running	 the
same.	The  High Court referred to the	 relevant  statutory
provisions and expressed the view that the primary requisite
of  'business'	as defined by the Act should be a  trade  or
commerce  or adventure in the nature of trade  or  commerce.
Presence  or  absence  of profit was not  material  but	 the
activity must be of a commercial character in the course  of
trade  or commerce.  It was found that the assessee had	 not
been carrying on business in the fair price shop.  The	High
Court  looked  into  the  articles  of	association  of	 the
assessee  and  found no article empowering it  to  carry  on
business  in fair price shop.  The assessee had opened	that
shop  only  to	provide an amenity to its  workmen  so	that
commodities  may be made available to them at  fair  prices.
According  to  the High Court if as a matter of	 fact,	some
profit	accrued that would be wholly immaterial because	 the
assessee  never	 intended to run the fair price	 shop  as  a
business having an element of commercial activity.397Section	  2of	 the  Act  'gives  the	 definitions.	 The
definitions  of "business" given in cl. (d), of "dealer"  as
given  in  cl.	(g) and of "sale" as given in  cl.  (n)	 are
reproduced below:(d)   "business" includes any trade,  commerce
	      or manufacture or any adventure or concern  in
	      the  nature of trade, commerce or	 manufacture
	      whether  or not any profit accrues  from	such
	      trade,  commerce,	 manufacture,  adventure  or
	      concern."(g)   "dealer" means any person who carries on
	      the business of buying, selling, supplying  or
	      distributing  goods,  directly  or  otherwise,
	      whether  for cash or for deferred	 payment  or
	      for commission, remuneration or other valuable
	      consideration and includes-(i).....................(iii) a  commission agent, a broker or  a	 del
	      credere  agent, or an auctioneer or any  other
	      mercantile agent, by whatever name called, who
	      carries  on the business of  buying,  selling,
	      supplying	 or distributing goods on behalf  of
	      any principal.(iv)(n)   "sale"   with   all	  its	 grammatical
	      variations and cognate expressions means every
	      transfer	of  the	 property in  goods  by	 one
	      person  to another in the course	of  business
	      for  cash	 or for deferred  payment  or  other
	      valuable	 consideration,	  and	includes   a
	      transfer of property in goods involved in	 the
	      execution	 of a works contract, but  does	 not
	      include  a mortgage, hypothecation, charge  or
	      pledge".By  the  Madras  General	Sales  Tax   (Second
	      Amendment)  Act, 1964, clause (d) ofs. 2was
	      substituted by the following clause
	      "business" includes-(i)   any	 trade, commerce or  manufacture  or
	      any  adventure  or concern in  the  nature  of
	      trade, commerce or manufacture whether or	 not
	      such  trade, commerce, manufacture,  adventure
	      or concern is carried on with a motive to make
	      gain  or profit and whether or not any  profit
	      accrues	 from	 such	 trade,	   commerce,
	      manufacture, adventure or concern and(ii)  any	 transaction in connection  with  or
	      incidental   or  ancillary  to,  such   trade,
	      commerce, manufacture,, adventure or concern".398Section 9validated the levy and collection of certain taxes
in the following terms :S.9.  "Notwithstanding anything  contained  in
	      any judgment, decree or order of any Court, no
	      levy  or	collection  of	any  tax  under	 the
	      provisions  of the principal Act and of  rules
	      made  thereunder	in respect of sales  in	 the
	      course  of  business,  whether or	 not  it  is
	      carried  on  with	 a motive to  make  gain  or
	      profit  shall be deemed to be invalid or	ever
	      to  have been invalid on the ground only	that
	      such levy or collection was not in  accordance
	      with  law and such tax levied or collected  or
	      purporting  to have been levied  or  collected
	      shall,  for all purposes, be deemed to be	 and
	      always   to  have	 been  validly	 levied	  or
	      collected and accordingly--(a)   all acts, proceedings or things done  or
	      taken  by	 the  State  Government	 or  by	 any
	      officer  of  the State Government	 or  by	 any
	      other authority in connection with the levy or
	      collection   of  such  tax  shall,   for	 all
	      purposes, be deemed to be, and to have, always
	      been, done or taken in accordance with law;(b)   no	suit or other proceedings  shall  be
	      maintained  or continued in any Court  against
	      the   State  Government  or  any	 person	  or
	      authority whatsoever for the refund of any tax
	      so paid; and(c)   no	Court  shall enforce any  decree  or
	      order directing the refund of any tax so paid;(d)   any such tax levied under the  principal
	      Act,  before the commencement of this Act	 but
	      not collected before such commencement or	 any
	      such tax leviable under the Principal Act	 but
	      not  levied  before such commencement  may  be
			    collected  (after  levy  of	 the  tax
 wherever
	      necessary)  in  the  manner  provided  in	 the
	      principal Act)".It has not been contended before us on behalf of the Revenue
that  the turnover of the sales by the fair price  shop	 and
the  canteen  could  be included  in  the  taxable  turnover
according to the definition of "business" as it stood in the
original  Act.	 The contention raised is thatS. 2of	 the
Second Amendment Act 1964 substituted the new definition  of
"business" with retrospective effect.  This result flows, it
is said, from the language ofS. 9although inS. 2of	that
Act no such language has been used as can give retrospective
operation  to  the amendment made.  We are unable  to  agree
thatS. 9by itself would make the definition of  "business"
as  substituted	 ins. 2retrospective.In State  of  Tamil
Nadu &399Another	 v.  M. Rayappa Gounderetc.(1) s. 7 of	 the  Madras
Entertainment Tax (Amendment) Act 1966 which was similar  to
S. 9 mentioned above came up for consideration. The question
was  whether the assessments were validly protected by	that
section.  Reliance  was place on certain decisions  of	this
Court  which  laid down that it is open to  the	 legislature
within	certain	 limits to amend the provisions of  the	 Act
retrospectively and to declare what the law shall be  deemed
to  have been but it was not open to the legislature to	 say
that a judgment of a court properly constituted and rendered
shall  be deemed to be ineffective. Hence it was  held	that
the impugned assessment in that case could not be sustained.
The  principle	which  has been laid down  clearly  is	that
validation of tax which has been declared to be illegal	 may
be done only if the grounds of illegality or invalidity	 are
capable of being removed and are in fact removed.  Sometimes
this   is   done  by  providing	  for	jurisdiction   where
jurisdiction   had  not	 been  properly	  invested   before.
Sometimes  this is achieved by reenacting retrospectively  a
valid and legal taxing provision and then by fiction  making
the tax already collected to stand under the reenacted	law.
The legislature can give its own meaning and  interpretation
of  the	 law  under  which the	tax  was  collected  and  by
legislative  fiat  make	 the new meaning  binding  upon	 the
courts. None of these methods has  been	  adopted   in	 the
present case. [seeShri Prithvi Cotton Mills Ltd. v.  Broach
Borough Municipality & Ors.(2)].Although  the definition of "business' was	 substituted
by  theSecond	 Amendment  Actof  1964  it  was  not	made
retrospective by the usual words that it should be deemed to
have  been  always substituted nor was	any  other  language
employed to show that the substantive provision, namely, the
definition of "business" was being amended  retrospectively.Section 9, therefore, can be of no avail to the Revenue.  It
has been pointed out that in the other decision rendered  by
this  Court in which similar validation	 provision  appeared
the substantive section had not been amended at all.   That,
in  our	 judgment will not make any difference	because	 the
essence	 of  the matter is that the definition of  the	word
"business" which was material was amended only prospectively
and  not with retrospective effect. It is common ground	 and
has not been disputed that if retrospective operation is not
given  toS.  2(d)of the Second  Amendment  Act  1964	 the
Revenue must fail in these appeals. We may add that we	have
not considered the question of the liability of the assessee
to  be	Assessed  subsequent to the amendment  made  by	 theSecond Amendment Actof 1964.In the result the appeals are dismissed with costs.V.P.S.			       Appeals dismissed.(1)  A.I.R. 1971 S.C. 231.(2)  [1970] 1 S.C.R. 388; 79 I.T.R. 136.400