Take notes as you read a judgment using ourVirtual Legal Assistantand get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out ourPremium Memberservices --Free for one month.Supreme Court of IndiaTata Iron And Steel Co., ... vs S. R. Sarkar And Others on 29 August, 1960Equivalent citations: 1961 AIR   65, 1961 SCR  (1) 379Author: S C.Bench: Sinha, Bhuvneshwar P.(Cj), Imam, Syed Jaffer, Sarkar, A.K., Gupta, K.C. Das, Shah, J.C.PETITIONER:
TATA IRON AND STEEL CO., LIMITED,BOMBAY

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
S.   R. SARKAR AND OTHERS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT:
29/08/1960

BENCH:
SHAH, J.C.
BENCH:
SHAH, J.C.
SINHA, BHUVNESHWAR P.(CJ)
IMAM, SYED JAFFER
SARKAR, A.K.
GUPTA, K.C. DAS

CITATION:
 1961 AIR   65		  1961 SCR  (1) 379
 CITATOR INFO :
 R	    1962 SC1621	 (12,46,105,109,125)
 F	    1963 SC 548	 (9)
 R	    1963 SC 980	 (12)
 E	    1963 SC1811	 (104)
 R	    1966 SC 563	 (21)
 R	    1966 SC1216	 (9,10)
 F	    1967 SC1131	 (5)
 R	    1970 SC1281	 (5)
 R	    1971 SC 477	 (8)
 MV	    1971 SC 870	 (45)
 R	    1973 SC2526	 (9)
 F	    1975 SC 887	 (6)
 F	    1975 SC1142	 (7)
 RF	    1975 SC1208	 (28)
 R	    1976 SC1016	 (19,24)
 R	    1979 SC1160	 (15)
 RF	    1981 SC 446	 (6)
 RF	    1986 SC1760	 (17,24)
 R	    1992 SC1952	 (7,8)


ACT:
Sales  Tax-Inter-State	sales-Sale effected by	transfer  of
documents  of title to goods during their movement from	 one
State  to another-Appropriate State to tax  such  sale-Place
where  sale  effected-Central  Sales Tax Act,  1956  (74  of
1956),ss. 2(a),3,4-Constitutionof India,Art. 286.HEADNOTE:
The  petitioner, a limited company carrying on the  business
of manufacturing and selling iron and steel goods, with	 its
factory at Jamshedpur in Bihar and its head Sales Office  in
Calcutta in west Bengal, was served with a notice on  August
12,  1959,  by	the Commercial Tax Officer  of	West  Bengal
directing it to submit a statement of sales from  Jamshedpur
for  the  period of assessment July 1, 1957,  to  March	 31,
1958, " the documents relating to which were transferred  in
West Bengal or of any other sales that may have taken  place
in  West Bengal unders. 3(b)of the Central Sales Tax	Act,
1956." For the same period, i.e., July 1, 1957 to March	 31,
1958, of assessment the petitioner had on December 15, 1958,
filed  with the Sales Tax Officer, Jamshedpur, a  return  of
inter-State  sales  made  from	Jamshedpur,  in	 which	were
included all sales in which movement of the goods had  taken
place  from the State of Bihar to destinations	outside	 the
State, and had paid advance tax under theCentral Sales	 Tax
Act,  1956.   The  petitioner contended	 before	 the  Taxing
Officer	 of West Bengal, inter alia, that in so far  as	 its
inter-State  sales from Jamshedpur were concerned the  situs
of such sales, as determined unders. 4(2)of the Act, would
always	be in the State of Bihar as the goods were in  Bihar
and that the State of West Bengal could not tax a sale where
goods  were under the contract of sale moved from  Bihar  to
Bengal even though the documents of title to the goods	sold
were transferred in Bengal, such sales being taxable only by
the State of Bihar.  The Taxing Officer, however, taxed	 all
the sales effected by the company underS. 3(b)on the	view
that  the sales in which the documents of title were  handed
over  in Calcutta were taxable in the State of	West  Bengal
because (1) all the sales effected in favour of West  Bengal
parties satisfied the conditions prescribed bys. 3(b),	 and
(2)  the  place where the documents were  delivered  by	 the
company	 to the purchaser was the place where the  sale	 was
effected.
Held,  per Sinha, C. J., Imam and Shah, jj., Sarkar and	 Das
Gupta, JJ., dissenting) : (1) that within cl. (b) ofs. 3of
the
49
380Central	 Sales	Tax Act, 1956, are included sales  in  which
property  in  the goods passes during the  movement  of	 the
goods from one State to another by transfer of documents  of
title  thereto clause (a) ofS. 3covers sales,	 other	than
those  included in cl. (b), in which the movement  of  goods
from  one  State to another is the result of a	covenant  or
incident of the contract of sale, and property in the  goods
passes in either State.
(2)  that  sub-s. (2) ofs. 4of the Act defines what  sales
or  purchases shall be deemed to take place inside  a  State
and,  thereby, locates the place where a sale  is  effected.
The  terms  of the sub-section being quite  general  provide
also  for  cases where sales are effected in the  course  of
inter-State trade or commerce unders. 3of the Act.
(3)  that  the	Taxing	authorities in West  Bengal  had  to
ascertain, before they could order payment of tax under	 theCentral	 Sales Tax Act, whether on the materials  they	were
satisfied  (a)	that the goods at the time  of	transfer  of
documents of title were in movement from the State of  Bihar
to  the State of West Bengal, and (b) that the	place  where
the  sale was effected was, underS. 4, cl. (2), within	 the
State of West Bengal.
Per  Sarkar  and Das Gupta, JJ.--A sale contemplated  bys.
3(b)of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956, is one  where	 the
transfer  of property in the goods sold takes place  by	 the
transfer of documents of title to them during their movement
from  one State to another and is effected within the  State
in which the documents of title are transferred ; that State
is  the " appropriate State " in respect of such  sale.	 (2)
The purpose ofS. 4(2)of the Act is to formulate principles
for determining when a sale takes place " outside a State ",
and  not to fix the place where a sale underS. 3(b)can  be
said to have taken effect.  The place of that sale is  fixed
by cl. (ii) of the Explanation inS. 2(a).



JUDGMENT:ORIGINAL JURISDICTION : Petition No. 199 of 1959.
Petition  underArticle 32of the Constitution of India	 for
enforcement of Fundamental Rights.A.   V. Viswanatha Sastri, N. A. Palkhivala S. N. Andley, J.
B.  Dadachanji,	 Rameshwar  Nath and P. L.  Vohra,  for	 the
petitioner.B.   Sen,  K. C. Mukherjee and P. K. Bose,  for	 respondents
Nos. 1 and 2.Lal Narayan Sinha and S. P. Varma, for respondent No. 3.
C.   K.	 Daphtary, Solicitor-General of India, R.  Ganapathy
Iyer, B. H. Dhebar and P. M. Sen for respondent No. 4.3811960.	August 29.  The judgment of the Court was  delivered
by
SHAH  J.-By  this  petition  for  writs	 of  certiorari	 and
mandamus,  the	Tata Iron and Steel Co.,  Ltd.,	 hereinafter
referred to as the-company, challenges the authority of	 the
Commercial  Tax	 Officer, Lyons Range, Calcutta,  to  demand
payment	  of  Rs.  41,14,718.12	 nP.  to  the  West   Bengal
Government  as tax leviable under theCentral Sales Tax	 ActNo. 74 of 1956 in respect of certain sales of steel goods.
The  company has its registered office in Bombay,  its	Head
Sales office in Calcutta in the State of West Bengal and its
factories in Jamshedpur in the State of Bihar.	The  company
is registered as a " dealer " under the Bihar Sales Tax Act,
and is also registered as a " dealer " in the State of	West
Bengal	under  theCentral Sales Tax Act,  1956.   For	 the
period	of assessment July 1, 1957, to March 31,  1958,	 the
company submitted its return of taxable sales to the Commer-
cial Tax Officer, Lyons Range, Calcutta, disclosing a  gross
taxable	 turnover  of Rs. 9,561-71 nP. in respect  of  sales
liable to Central sales tax in the State of West Bengal.  By
his  memorandum	 dated August 12, 1959, the  Commercial	 Tax
Officer directed the company to submit a statement of  sales
from Jamshedpur for the period under assessment, " documents
relating to which were transferred in West Bengal or of	 any
other  sales that may have taken place in West Bengal  under
s.  3(b) of theCentral Sales Tax Act, 1956 ". The  company,
by  its	 letter dated September 30, 1959, informed  the	 Tax
Officer that the requisition for production of statement  of
sales  made  from Jamshedpur in the  course  of	 inter-State
trade  or  commerce was without jurisdiction.	The  company
contended  that " all the sales from Jamshedpur were of	 the
type  mentioned ins. 3(a)of the Central Sales Tax Act	 and
at the same time, some of them also fell within the category
mentioned  ins. 3(b)of the Act ", that even if  the  sales
were  "	 of the type mentioned ins. 3(b)of  the  Act,	 the
appropriate State of the place where the sales take place or
are effected alone had jurisdiction382to  assess  such sales to Central sales tax ", and  that  in
respect	 of inter-State sales from Jamshedpur, the situs  of
the sale was always the State of Bihar as the goods were  in
Bihar  either at the time of the contract of sale or at	 the
time  of appropriation to the contract.	 By his order  dated
October	 21, 1959, the Commercial Tax Officer made a "	best
judgment   assessment	"  on  a  gross	 turnover   of	 Rs.
9,00,09,561.71	nP. of interState sales and called upon	 the
company to pay Rs. 41,14,718.12 nP. as tax under theCentral
Sales Tax Act.The company had, on December 15, 1958, filed with the  Sales
Tax  Officer, Jamshedpur, a return of interState sales	made
from  Jamshedpur for the period July 1, 1957, to  March	 31,
1958,  and a return for the same period for the	 sales	made
from Dhanbad with the Sales Tax Officer, Dhanbad.  In  these
returns, the company included all sales in which movement of
the  goods  had	 taken	place from the	State  of  Bihar  to
destinations  outside  that State.  The	 total	turnover  in
respect	 of  such inter-State sales as shown in	 the  return
exceeded  Rs. 26 crores and the company paid as required  by
the  Bihar  Sales Tax Act Rs. 71 lakhs odd  as	advance	 tax
under theCentral Sales Tax Act, 1956.By  this  petition the company impugns the validity  of	 the
order  of  the Commercial Tax Officer and claims a  writ  of
certiorari  quashing and setting aside the assessment  order
dated October 21, 1959, and a writ of mandamus directing the
Commercial  Tax	 Officer  to refrain from  taking  steps  in
enforcement or implementation of the order.
Counsel for the respondents contends that the petition underArt.  32of the Constitution is not maintainable because  no
fundamental  right of the company is infringed by the  order
passed	by the Commercial Tax Officer and the remedy of	 the
company,  if  it feels aggrieved by the order,	is  to	seek
relief	by resorting to the machinery provided by  the	West
Bengal	Sales  Tax Act.	 Counsel relies in  support  of	 his
contention  upon the judgments of this court inRamjilal  V.
Income Tax Officer, Mohindargarh(1) and Laxmanappa
(1)  [1951] S.C.R. 127.383Hanumantappa  Jamkhandi	 v. The Union of India	and  another(1).   In  Ramjilal's  case (2), this Court  held  that	 the
protection against imposition and collection of tax save  by
authority  of law directly arises fromArt. 265and  is	 not
secured by cl. 1 ofArt. 31 ;andArt. 265not being in	 Ch.
III of the Constitution, its protection is not a fundamental
right which can be enforced by an application underArt.  32of the Constitution.  It was observed in Ramjilal's case (2)
that  the  right  secured byArt. 265may  be	enforced  by
adopting  appropriate proceedings under the Act	 authorising
levy of tax but a petition founded onArt. 32read withArt.
31(1)was  misconceived  and  must  fail.   That  view	 was
reiterated  in Laxmanappa's case(1).  But it has  been	held
that  a threat by the State to realize without authority  of
law  tax  from a citizen by using coercive machinery  of  an
impugned  Act  is an infringement of the  fundamental  right
guaranteed  to	him  underArt. 19(1)(g)and  gives  to	 the
aggrieved citizen a right to seek relief by a petition under
the  Constitution (seeHimmatlal Harilal Mehta v. The  State
of  Madhya  Pradeshand others	 (3),The  Bengal  Immunity
Company	 Ltd. v. The State of Biharand others (4) andThe,
State of Bombay v. The United Motors (India) Ltd. and others(5).   In these cases, in appeals from orders passed by	 the
High  Courts  in petitions underArt. 226, this	 Court	held
that an attempt to levy tax under a statute which was  ultra
vires  infringed the fundamental right of the  citizens	 and
recourse to the High Court for protection of the fundamental
right was not prohibited because of the provisions contained
inArt.  265.In the case before us,	 the  vires  of	 theCentral	 Sales	Tax Act, 1956, are not	challenged;  but  inKailash	 Nath and another v. The State of Uttar Pradesh	 and
others(6)  a petition challenging the levy of	 a  tax	 was
entertained  by	 this Court even though the  Act  under	 the
authority  of which the tax was sought to be  recovered	 was
not  challenged	 as ultra vires.  It is	 not  necessary	 for
purposes  of  this case to decide whether the  principle  of
Kailash Nath's case (6) is inconsistent
(1)  [1955] 1 S.C.R. 769
(3)  [1954]   S.C.R. 1122.(5)  [1953]   S.C.R. 1069
(2)  [1951]   S.C.R. 127.(4)  [1955] 2 S.C.R. 603.(6)  A.I.R. 1957 S. C. 790.384with  the  view expressed by this Court in  Ramjilal's	case
(1).   Evidently,  the	company has paid to  the  Sales	 Tax
Officer,  Bihar, tax due under theCentral Sales Tax Acton
its  turnover including sales on which the tax is sought  to
be levied by the Commercial Tax Officer, West Bengal.Under
the  Central Sales Tax Act, there is a single  liability  to
pay  tax on inter-State sales.	The company having paid	 the
tax  to	 the Bihar State for and on behalf  of	the  Central
Government, the threat to recover again sales tax on  behalf
of  the Central Government in respect of the same sales,  i.
e.,  sales which are included in the assessment	 proceedings
before the Bihar Sales Tax authorities prima facie infringes
the  fundamental right of the company to hold  its  property
and  the  company is entitled to approach this	Court  underArt.  32of the Constitution.	 The  preliminary  objection
raised by counsel for the respondents must therefore fail.
To  appreciate the arguments advanced on the merits  of	 the
claim  made by the company, it is necessary to set  out	 the
relevant  legislative  history and the	course	of  judicial
decisions.Under the Government of India Act, 1935, power to make	laws
in respect of " taxes on sale of goods and advertisements  "
was conferred bys. 100(1)read with entry 48 of List II  in
Schedule  VII upon the Provincial Legislatures.	 This  power
was exercised by all the Provinces and by picking out one or
more  ingredients constituting a sale, as  determinative  of
the place where the sale took place, they brought within the
taxing	 laws	transactions   substantially   outside	 the
territorial limits of their authority.	Statutes so  enacted
led to multiple taxation of the same transaction by  several
Provinces,   each  Province  seeking  to  rely	 upon	some
ingredient   of	  the  sale  within  its   jurisdiction	  as
establishing a territorial nexus.This burden lay heavily upon the consumer.  The	 Constituent
Assembly  was  seriously exercised over this  situation	 and
tried  to meet the problem by placing restrictions upon	 the
taxing power of the States in respect of sales and purchases
having	 inter-State   elements.Article   286of	 the
Constitution was one of
(1)  [1951] S.C.R. 127.385the Articles enacted for that purpose.	That Article  before
it  was amended by the Constitution (Sixth  Amendment)	Act,
1956, stood as follows:(1)  No	 law  of  a State shall	 impose,  or  authorise	 the
imposition of, a tax on the sale or purchase of goods  where
such sale or purchase takes place-(a)  outside the State ; or(b)  in	 the  course  of the import of the  goods  into,  or
export of the goods out of, the territory of India.
Explanation:-For  the purposes of sub-clause (a), a sale  or
purchase shall be deemed to have taken place in the State in
which  the  goods have actually been delivered as  a  direct
result	of  such  sale	or  purchase  for  the	purpose	  of
consumption  in	 that State, relating to sale of  goods	 the
property in the goods has by reason of such sale or purchase
passed in another State.(2)  Except  in	 so far as Parliament may by  law  otherwise
provide,  no law of a State shall impose, or  authorise	 the
imposition  of, a tax on the sale or purchase of  any  goods
where  such  sale or purchase takes place in the  course  of
inter-State trade or commerce--Provided  that the President  may by order direct  that	 any
tax  on	 the  sale  or purchase of  goods  which  was  being
lawfully  levied by the Government of any State	 immediately
before	 the  commencement  of	this  Constitution,   shall,
notwithstanding that the imposition of such tax is  contrary
to  the	 provisions of this clause, continue  to  be  levied
until the thirty-first day of March, 1951.
(3)  No law made by the Legislature of a State imposing,  or
authorising the imposition of, a tax on the sale or purchase
of  any such goods as have been declared. by  Parliament  by
law to be essential for the life of the community shall have
effect unless it has been reserved for the consideration  of
the President and has received his assent.
As  framed,  the Article attempted to  enunciate  restraints
upon  the legislative power of the States: but the  somewhat
inartistic  form in which the Article and  particularly	 the
Explanation was couched, obscured instead of clarifying	 the
meaning of the Constituent386Assembly The scope ofArt. 286fell to be determined in	 theState,	of  Bombay v. United Motors (India) Ltd. (1)  in  an
appeal to this court in which the validity of the provisions
of  the Bombay Sales Tax Act, 1952 was challenged.   By	 the
Bombay	Act  liability to pay tax was imposed  on  sales  of
goods  which  had been actually delivered in  the  State  of
Bombay	as  a  direct result of sales  for  the	 purpose  of
consumption in that State even if property in the goods had,
by reason of such sales, passed in another State.  The	High
Court  of Bombay in a petition underArt. 226held that	 the
definition  of sale in the Act included certain sales  which
were  byArt. 286of the Constitution exempt from  liability
to  tax	 by  the State and the tax  imposed,  was  therefore
wholly	void.  A majority of Judges hearing an	appeal	from
that  judgment	to  this  Court	 held  thatArt.  286(1)(a)prohibited  taxation of sales or purchases involving  inter-
State  elements by all States except the State in which	 the
goods were actually delivered for the purpose of consumption
therein,  and the effect of the Explanation thereto  was  to
convert	   inter-State	  transactions	  into	  intrastate
transactions and to remove them from the operation of cl. 2.
On  this  view,	 the majority of the Judges  held  that	 the
Bombay	Sales  Tax Act did not contraveneArt.	 286.This
interpretation ofArt. 286did not meet with the approval of
a  larger  Bench of this Court which heard and	decided	 the
Bengal	Immunity Co.'s case (2).  In that case four  out  of
the  seven  judges  constituting the  Bench  held  that	 the
operative  provisions  of  the several parts  ofArt.	286,
namely cl. 1(a), cl. 1(b) and cls. 2 and 3 were intended  to
deal with different topics and one " could not be  projected
or read into another ". According to the minority view,Art.
286(1)(a)located  the situs of the sales with	 a  view  to
avoid multiple taxation and for that purpose, it divided the
sales  into two categories-', inside sales " and  "  outside
sales  ", and thatArt. 286(2)applied to the sales  in	 the
course of inter-State trade and the sales which fell  within
the Explanation were intrastate sales.In M/s.	 Ram  Narain
Sons Ltd. v. Assistant Commissioner of Sales(1) [1953] S.C.R. 1069.(2) [1955] 2 S.C.R. 603.387Tax  and  others  (1) which was	 decided  after	 the  Bengal
Immunity Co.'s case  (2)  this Court held:"The  bans imposed byArt. 286of the Constitution  on
the taxing powers of the States are independent and separate
and  each  one	of them has to be got over  before  a  State
Legislature  can  impose  tax on  transactions	of  sale  or
purchase  of  goods.   The  Explanation	 toArt.  286(1)(a)determines by the legal fiction created therein the situs of
the  sale  in the case of transactions	coming	within	that
category and once it is determined by the application of the
Explanation  that  a transaction is outside  the  State,  it
follows as a matter of course that the State, with reference
to  which  the	transaction can thus  be  predicated  to  be
outside it, can never tax the transaction."
The  Constitution was thereafter amended, Explanation  1  of
rt. 286 was deleted and cls. 2 and 3 thereto were altered by
the amendment.	As amended,Art. 286stands as follows:Art.  286:-1.No law of a State shall impose, or  authorise
the  imposition of, a tax on the sale or purchase of  goods,
where such sale or purchase takes place-(a)  outside the State; or(b)  in	 the  course  of the import of the  goods  into,  or
export of the goods out of, the territory of India.2.   Parliament	  may  by  law	formulate   principles	 for
determining when a sale or purchase of goods takes place  in
any of the ways mentioned in cl. 1.3.   Any  law of a State shall, in so far as it imposes,  or
authorises the imposition of, a tax on the sale or  purchase
of  goods  declared by Parliament by law to  be	 of  special
importance  in inter-State trade or commerce, be subject  to
such restrictions and conditions in regard to the system  of
levy, rates and other incidents of the tax as Parliament may
by law specify.Simultaneously,	  the  Parliament  was	authorised  by	 the
incorporation of item 92A in List I of the seventh schedule,
to  legislate  for levying tax on the sale  or	purchase  of
goods other than newspapers, where such
(1)  [1955] 2 S.C.R. 483.(2) [1955] 2. S.C.R. 60350(2) [1955] 2 S.C.R. 603.388sale  or  purchase takes place in the course  of  interState
trade  or commerce, and by the amendment of item 54 of	List
II  excluded that field of taxation from the  competence  of
the State Legislatures.Art. 269, cl. 1(g), which was	also
amended by cl. 3 to that Article read after the amendment as
follows:"Parliament may by law formulate principles for	 determining
when  a sale or purchase of goods takes place in the  course
of inter-State trade or commerce ".The   effect  of  these	 diverse  amendments  made  by	 the
Constitution (Sixth Amendment) Act, 1956, was to invest	 the
Parliament  with exclusive authority to enact laws  imposing
tax on sale or purchase of goods where such sale or purchase
takes place in the course of inter-State trade or  commerce,
and  the tax collected by the States was to be	assigned  in
the  mariner  provided	by cl. 2 ofArt. 269to  the  State
within which the tax was leviable.In  exercise of authority conferred upon the  Parliament  byArt.  286andArt. 269, cl. 3, the Parliament	enacted	 theCentral Sales Tax Act(74 of 1956).The Actwas enacted  as
the preamble recites:"  to  formulate principles for determining when a  sale  or
purchase  of goods takes place in the course of	 inter-State
trade  or  commerce or outside a State or in the  course  of
import	into or export from India, to provide for the  levy,
collection  and distribution of taxes on sales of  goods  in
the  course of inter-State trade or commerce and to  declare
certain	 goods	to be of special importance  in	 inter-State
trade	or  commerce  and  specify  the	  restrictions	 and
conditions to which State laws imposing taxes on the sale or
purchase  of  such  goods of  special  importance  shall  be
subject ".By  chapter 2 of the Act,ss. 3,4and5,  those  principles
were  formulated and by chapter 3, detailed provisions	were
made for imposing liability to pay tax on inter-State sales,
for  registration  of dealers, fixing rates of tax  and	 for
levy  and collection of tax and for imposing  penalties	 for
breach	of  the provisions of the Act relating to  levy	 and
collection of inter-State sales tax.  Bys. 6, every  dealer
was  made liable to pay tax on all sales effected by him  in
the course of inter-State389trade or commerce.  By sub-s. 2 ofs. 8, the rates of tax on
sales  in the course of inter-State trade or  commerce	were
directed  to  be calculated at the same rates s and  in	 the
same manner as would have been done if the sale had in	fact
taken  place  inside the appropriate State.  Bys.  9,	 the
machinery  for	levy and collection of tax  was	 prescribed.
The tax payable by any dealer under the Act was to be levied
and  collected	by  the	 appropriate  State  in	 the  manner
provided by sub-s. 2 which enacts that the authority for the
time being empowered to assess, collect and enforce  payment
of  any	 tax  under  the  General  Sales  Tax  Law  of	 the
appropriate State shall on behalf of the Government of India
assess,	 collect and enforce payment of any tax	 payable  by
any  dealer under the Act in the same manner as the  tax  on
the  sale or purchase of goods under the General  Sales	 Tax
Law  of	 the State is assessed, paid and collected.   It  is
manifest  that	bys.	6which	 is  the  charging  section,
liability  to pay tax on inter-State sales is  imposed	upon
all sales effected by any dealer in the course of interstate
trade  or  commerce.   The liability to pay  tax  under	 theCentral	 Sales Tax Actarises as an inter-State	 sale.	 The
tax  though collected by the State in which the	 sale  takes
place is due to the Central Government and is payable at the
rates prescribed in respect of intrastate sales by the State
in which it is collected.Sale  is  defined  ins. 2(g)as  meaning  any	transfer  of
property  in goods by one person to another for cash or	 for
deferred payment or for any other valuable consideration and
includes  a transfer of goods on the hire purchase or  other
system	of  payment by instalments, but does not  include  a
mortgage or hypothecation of or a charge or pledge on goods.
Bys. 3, a sale or purchase of goods is deemed to take place
in  the course of inter-State trade or commerce if the	sale
or  purchase  (a) occasions the movement of goods  from	 one
State  to  another,  or	 (b)  is  effected  by	transfer  of
documents  of title to the goods during their movement	from
one  State to another.	A transaction of sale is subject  to
tax under theCentral Sales Tax Acton the completion of the
sale, and a mere contract of sale is390not a sale within the definition of sale ins. 2(g).  A sale
being  by  the	definition, transfer  of  property,  becomes
taxable	 under	s. 3(a) if the movement of  goods  from	 one
State  to  another is under a covenant or  incident  of	 the
contract  of sale, and the property in the goods  passes  to
the  purchaser	otherwise than by transfer of  documents  of
title  when  the  goods are in movement from  one  State  to
another.   In  respect of an inter-State sale,	the  tax  is
leviable  only once and that indicates that the two  clauses
ofs. 3are mutually exclusive.  A sale taxable as  falling
within cl. (a) ofs. 3, will be excluded from the purview of
cl. (b) ofs. 3; otherwise certain sales may, be liable  to
tax under both the clauses and two States may, in respect of
a single sale, claim to levy the tax contrary to the plain
intendment ofss. 6and9of the Act.The sale contemplated by cl. (b) is one which is effected by
transfer  of  documents of title to the goods  during  their
movement  from One State to another.  Where the property  in
the goods has passed before the movement has commenced,	 the
sale  will evidently not fall within cl. (b); nor  will	 the
sale  in  which the property in the goods passes  after	 the
movement from one State to another has ceased be covered  by
the  clause.   Accordingly a 'sale effected by	transfer  of
documents  of title after the commencement of  movement	 and
before its conclusion as defined by the two terminii set out
in Explanation (1) and no other sale will be regarded as  an
inter-State  sale  unders. 3(b).  The	 definition  of	 the
expression  " sale " undoubtedly includes transfer of  goods
on hire-purchase or other systems of payment by instalments,
but  thereby, a mere contract of sale which does not  result
in  transfer of property occasioning movement of goods	from
one  State to another does not fall within the terms  ofs.
3(a).	That transaction alone in which there is "  transfer
of goods " on the hire-purchase or other systems of  payment
by  instalments is included in the definition of "  sale  ".
The  question  whether a mere contract in  which  goods	 are
delivered under a hire. purchase agreement is a sale  within
the meaning ofs.   2, cl. (g) and therefore, covered by cl.(a) ofs. 3does391not  fall to be determined in this case: nor are  we  called
upon  to  express our opinion on the  question	whether	 the
clause	authorising imposition of sales tax on what  may  be
merely	a contract of sale is unconstitutional.	 We  are  in
this  case concerned to decide the competing claims  of	 the
States	of West Bengal and Bihar to levy sales tax from	 the
company	 in respect of transactions of completed  sales	 and
not in respect of any hire-purchase transactions.
Cases  of this Court, viz.,State of  Travancore-Cochin	 and
others	v. The Bombay Co., Ltd. (1) andState of  Travancore
Cochin and others v. Shanmugha Vilas Cashew Nut Factory	 and
others(2)  relied upon by counsel for the  State  of	West
Bengal	have no bearing on the interpretation ofs. 3,	cls.(a)   and  (b).	  In  those  cases,  the  meaning   of	 the
expressions, " in the course of import and export " and ',in
the  course of interState trade or commerce " used  inArt.
286fell to be determined.  The Constitution does not define
these expressions.  The Parliament has in theCentral  Sales
Tax  Act,  1956,  sought to define bys. 3when	 a  sale  or
purchase  of  goods is said to take place in the  course  of
inter-State trade or commerce and bys. 4(1)to define	when
a sale or purchase of goods is said to take place outside  a
State  and bys. 5, when a sale or purchase is said to	take
place  in the course of import or export.   In	interpreting
these  definition  clauses,  it would  be  inappropriate  to
requisition in aid the observations made in ascertaining the
true  nature  and incidents without the	 assistance  of	 any
definition clause of " sales outside the State " and " sales
in the course of import or export " and Bales in the  course
of interState trade or commerce used inArt. 286.In our view, therefore, within cl. (b) ofs. 3are  included
sales  in  which  property in the goods	 passes	 during	 the
movement of the goods from one State to another by  transfer
of  documents  of  title thereto : cl. (a) ofs.  3covers
sales,	other than those included in cl. (b), in  which	 the
movement of goods from one State to another is the result of
a covenant or incident of the contract of sale, and property
in the goods passes in either State.(1) [1952] S.C.R. 1112.(2) [1954] S.C.R. 5.3.392The  question to which attention must then be  directed	 is,
which out of the two or more States concerned with the goods
sold  under an inter- State sale is entitled to collect	 the
tax  under Act 74 of 1956.  Bys. 9, the tax payable by	 any
dealer under the Act is to be levied and collected in the  "
appropriate  State ". The expression " appropriate  State  "
was at the material time defined bys. 2(a)as follows:
"Appropriate State " means:-(i)  in	 relation to a dealer who has one or more places  of
business situate in the same State, that State ;(ii) in	 relation to a dealer who has one or more places  of
business situate in different States, every such State	with
respect	 to the place or places of business  situate  within
its territory ;Explanation:-" Place of business " means,(i)  in the case of a sale of goods in the course of  inter-
State trade or commerce falling within cl. (a) ofs.   3,
the place from which the goods have been moved by reason  of
such sale ;(ii) in the case of any such sale falling within cl. (b)  of
s. 3, the place where the sale is effected.This  definition  made	the  State in  which  the  place  of
business  is  situate,	the appropriate State;	and  by	 the
Explanation,  the  expression  " place	of  business  "	 was
defined	 in relation to the two classes of sales ins. 3as
sales  in the course of inter-State trade or  commerce.	  By
the  first part of the definition, in case of sale of  goods
falling within cl. (a), the place from which the goods	have
been  moved  is the place of business and by cl. 2,  in	 the
case  of  sales falling within cl. (b) ofs.  3,  the  place
where  the sale is effected is the place of business.	This
evidently is a highly artificial definition.  By a  fiction,
the place from which goods have been moved by reason of	 the
sale  falling  within cl. (a) ofs. 3, that is,	 that  place
from  which the goods have been moved under the contract  of
sale for the purpose of delivery to the purchaser in another
State  was declared the place of business.  By another	fic-
tion,  the place where the sale is effected  in	 inter-State
transactions falling withins. 3(b)was declared the393place of business.  In ascertaining the place of business as
defined by the Explanation, for cases falling within cl. (a)
ofs. 3, little practical difficulty arises.  But in  cases
of  sales falling within cl. (b), the location of the  place
where  "  the sale is effected " for  ascertainment  of	 the
place  of  business within the meaning	of  the	 Explanation
raises difficult problems.  As observed by Das, Acting Chief
Justice, in Bengal Immunity Company's case (1) at p. 649:
" The situs of an intangible concept like a sale can only be
fixed  notionally  by the application  of  artificial  rules
invented  either by Judges as part of the judge-made law  of
the land or by some legislative authority.  But so far as we
know,  no fixed rule of universal application has  yet	been
evolved for deter. mining this for all purposes.  There	 are
many  conflicting theories: One, which is more	popular	 and
frequently put forward and is referred to and may indeed  be
urged  to have been adopted by the  Constitution............
favours	 the place where the property in the  goods  passes,
another which is said to be the American view......... fixes
upon  the  place where the contract is	concluded,  a  third
which  prevails	 in  the  continental  countries  of  Europe
prefers	 the  place  where  the	 goods	sold  are   actually
delivered, a fourth points to the place where the  essential
ingredients  which  go to make up a sale  are  most  densely
grouped ".Ex facie, cl. 2 of the Explanation tos. 2(a)does not	seek
to  locate  the place where the sale is	 effected  in  cases
falling	 within	 cl.  (b) ofs. 3at  the  place  where	 the
transfer  of documents of title to the goods  was  effected.
Parliament  has	 classified  the sales " in  the  course  of
inter-State trade or commerce " in cls. (a) and (b) ofs.  3and  by the first clause of the Explanation tos.  2(a),  in
cases of sales falling withins. 3(a)the place of  business
is  the place from which movement has commenced and  in	 the
case of sales falling withins. 3(b), it is the place  where
the  sale is effected.	But there is in the  Explanation  no
material  for  ascertaining  the place	where  the  sale  is
effected.(1)  [1955] 2 S.C.R. 603.394There was a sharp conflict of opinion as to the true meaning
ofArt. 286, cls. 1(a) and (b) and the Explanation as	they
stood  before  the  amendment  by  the	Constitution  (Sixth
Amendment) Act, 1956.  In the United Motors' case (1) it was
opined	by a majority of the judges of this Court thatArt.
286(1)(a)prohibited	taxation  of  sales   or   purchases
involving interstate elements by all States except the State
in  which  the	goods  were delivered  for  the	 purpose  of
consumption  therein, and the latter State was left free  to
tax  such sales or purchases and that power was not  derived
from  the Explanation toArt. 286(1)but underArt.  246(3)read  with  entry  54  in List II.   Mr.  Justice  Bose	 who
disagreed  with	 the  majority	held  that  the	 basic	idea
underlyingArt. 286was to prohibit taxation in the  course
of inter-State trade and commerce until the ban under cl.  2
of  the said Article was lifted by Parliament and always  in
the  case  of  imports and exports, and	 when  the  ban	 was
lifted, the Explanation to cl. 1 ofArt. 286came into	play
to  determine  the situs of the sale,  the  explanation	 not
governing cl. 2 as it applied to transactions which in truth
and  in fact took place in the course of  inter-State  trade
and  commerce.	 Mr. Justice Bhagwati who  agreed  with	 the
conclusion  of the majority as to the vires of the  impugned
Act, opined that the Explanation toArt. 286(1)did not take
away the right which the State in which the property in	 the
goods  passed  had  to tax the sale or	purchase,  but	only
deemed	such  purchase or sale by a legal  fiction  to	have
taken place in the State in which the delivery of the  goods
had  been  made for consumption so as to enable	 the  latter
State also to tax the sale or purchase in question.  In	 The
Bengal	Immunity CO.'s case (2), Das, Acting Chief  Justice,
in delivering the judgment of the majority observed that the
several	 parts ofArt. 286, viz., cls. 1(a), 1(b),  (2)	 and
(3)  were intended to deal with different topics;  that	 the
Explanation to cl. 1(a) toArt. 286should not	legitimately
be  extended  to  cl. (b) either as an	exception  or  as  a
proviso thereto or read as curtailing or limiting the  ambit
of cl. 2; thatArt. 286(1)(a)fixed
(1) [1953] S.C.R. 1069.(2) [1955] 2 S.C.R. 603.395the  situs  of	the  sales with a  view	 to  avoid  multiple
taxation and for that purpose classified the sales into	 two
categories,  inside  sales and outside sales and  s  enacted
that  the State cannot tax outside sales and the purpose  of
the  Explanation  which	 declared a sale in  the  course  of
inter-State trade must be deemed to have taken place  inside
the  State in which the goods are delivered for	 consumption
was  clearly  to take it out of the  inter-State  trade	 and
impress it with the character of an intra-State sale.	This
view was followed inM/s.  Ram Narain Sons Ltd. v. Assistant
Commissioner of Sales Tax & others(1).Evidently, by the interpretation placed by this Court on the
scope  and  meaning  ofArt.  286as	originally  enacted,
Parliament   was  faced	 with  a  difficult  problem.	 The
Parliament had to examine the problem of taxing	 inter-State
trade and commerce in the light of three principal  factors,
namely,	 (1) the constitutional freedom of  trade,  commerce
and   intercourse   guaranteed	 byArt.   301,   (2)the
inadvisability	of allowing the States unrestricted  freedom
to levy or impose taxes on sales or purchases of goods	with
interState content, and (3) the necessity to impose restric-
tions  on  multiple taxation of the same sale  by  different
States.	 The Parliament deleted the Explanation to cl. 1  ofArt.  286which had given rise to this serious	conflict  of
views  and  recast cls. 2 and 3. By cl. 2  as  amended,	 the
Parliament  was	 authorised  to	 formulate  principles	 for
determining when a sale or purchase of goods takes place  in
any of the ways mentioned in cl. 1 ; and by the addition  of
item  92A  in List I of the seventh  schedule,	the  Central
Government alone could tax sales or purchases of goods which
take  place in the course of inter-State trade or  commerce.
By  incorporating cl. 3 toArt. 269, the Parliament  assumed
to itself the power to formulate principles for	 determining
when  a sale or purchase of goods takes place in the  course
of  inter-State	 trade	or  commerce.	It  is	after	this
amendment was made that theCentral Sales Tax Act, 1956, was
enacted	 with a view to provide for collection of a  tax  on
sales or purchases in
(1)  [1955] 2 S.C.R. 483.51396the course of inter-State trade or commerce.  The Parliament
had  to	 define sales in the course of interState  trade  or
commerce,  sales  in  the course of import  or	export,	 and
intrastate sales.  The Parliament set out bys. 3to  define
sales of goods which can be said to take place in the course
of inter-State trade or commerce, bys. 4(1)to define	when
a  sale is said to take place outside a State, and bys.  5when  a sale is said to take place in the course  of  import
and in the course of export.  Bys. 9, authority to tax	 was
conferred  upon the appropriate State, and  that  expression
was  defined bys. 2as the State where the dealer  had	 his
place of business, and in respect of sales which fall within
cl.  (b)  ofs. 3, the place of business of the	 dealer	 was
declared to be the place where the sale is effected.  Bys.
3, it was intended to define the class of sales which  shall
be deemed to be sales in the course of inter-State trade  or
commerce,   but	 the  conditions  which	 go  to	 make	such
transactions,  sales in the course of inter-State  trade  or
commerce as set out by cls. (a) and (b) were not intended to
locate the place where the sale takes place.
The  legal position as to taxability of sales in the  course
of inter-State trade or commerce was unsatisfactory and	 the
Parliament  radically  amendedArt.  286and	the   allied
Articles.   It also enacted a special Act  authorising	levy
and  collection of Central Sales Tax with a view to  prevent
rivalry	 and  competition between different States.   Is  it
then to be assumed that the Parliament still left the law in
so  far	 as it related to a class of sales  covered  by	 the
description  of sales in the course of inter-State trade  or
commerce  in  the  same	 unsatisfactory	 condition   without
enacting where the sales in cases falling within cl. (b)  of
s. 3 were effected?Before	proceeding  to answer that query, attention  may  be
directed tos. 4of Act 74 of 1956.  It is as follows: ,
"(1) Subject to the provisions contained in s.3 when a	sale
or purchase of goods is determined in accordance with sub-s.
(2)  to	 take place inside a State, such  sale	or  purchase
shall  be  deemed  to have taken  place	 outside  all  other
States.397(2)  A	sale  or purchase of goods shall be deemed  to	take
place inside a State if the goods are within the State-(a)  in	 the case of specific or ascertained goods,  at	 the
time the contract of sale is made ; and(b)  in	 the case of unascertained or future goods,  at	 the
time  of their appropriation to the contract of sale by	 the
seller or by the buyer, whether assent of the other party is
prior or subsequent to such appropriation.
Explanation:-Where  there  is a single contract of  sale  or
purchase  of  goods situated at more places  than  one,	 the
provisions of this sub-section shall apply as if there	were
separate  contracts in respect of the goods at each of	such
places."Sub-section 2defines what sales or purchases shall be
deemed to take place inside a State.  The terms of sub-s.  2
are quite general, and the Parliament has thereby  attempted
to  locate the place where a sale takes place.	 The  clause
does  not deal with the conditions which " effect " a  gale:
nor is there any warrant for the view that sub-s. 2 ofs.  4only seeks to locate the place of sale which are not in	 the
course of interState trade or commerce.	 By enacting ch. 11,
the Parliament sought as evidenced by the title of the chap-
ter to exercise its power underArt. 269(3)and286(2).By
s.  3, the Parliament formulated principles for	 determining
when  a sale or purchase of goods takes place in the  course
of  inter-State	 trade	or  commerce and  in  so  doing,  it
exercised  authority conferred upon it byArt.	269(3).In
enactings. 4, cl. (1), the Parliament sought to  formulate
principles for determining when a sale takes place outside a
State  and  in	enacting  that	section,  it  legislated  in
exercise  of authority underArt. 286(2)read with cl.	1(a)
of  that Article; and in enactings. 5, sub-ss. 1 and 2,  it
exercised authority underArt. 286(2)read with cl. 1(b)  of
the Article to formulate principles for determining the sale
which  takes place in the course of import or  export.	 The
Parliament  by sub-s. 2 ofs. 4attempted to define  when  a
sale  shall be deemed to take place inside a State,  and  by
sub-s.	1 ofs. 4provided that when a sale or398purchase of goods was determined in accordance with sub-s. 2
to take place inside a State, such sale or purchase shall be
deemed	to have taken place outside all other  States.	 But
sub-s.	1  having  been	 made  subject	to  the	  provisions
contained ins. 3, it is evident that only those sales which
were  not  in  the course of interState	 trade	or  commerce
should be determined under sub-s. 1 ofs. 4as having  taken
place  outside	a  State.  We are unable to  hold  that	 any
weight	can be attached to the argument that if it  was	 the
object of the Legislature by enacting sub-s. (2) ofs. 4to
explain	 the expression, " where the sale is effected  "  as
used  in  cl.  (ii)  of the  Explanation  tos.  2(a),	 the
Legislature would have expressly stated so.  Nor are we able
to agree with the contention thats. 4only seeks to  define
"  outside sales " and is not intended to locate  the  place
where  a  sale	is  effected.	The  argument  that  by	 the
application ofs. 4, sub-s. 2, in cases where the goods sold
are unascertained or future goods, there will be  difficulty
in  ascertaining the place where the sale is  effected,	 has
also no force.	In any event,s. 4(2)may not be denied	 its
full operation, merely because difficulty may be encountered
in some cases in ascertaining the place where it is effected
by the application of the rules set out therein.
The Commercial Tax Officer has observed in his order that:
"  In this case, it should be remembered thatsection	3(b)refers to transfer of documents and not only to transfer  of
documents  by endorsement.  Thus, even if the documents	 are
in  the	 name  of  the buyer  as  consignee  but  these	 are
physically transferred to the buyer in West Bengal then that
sale is taxable in West Bengal.	 In case of goods  consigned
to  "  Self  " there is no question  that  delivery  to	 the
railways cannot be constituted as delivery to the buyer "
But  under theSale of Goods Act, if a document of title  to
goods is used in the ordinary course of business as proof of
the possession or control of goods, endorsement or  delivery
thereof	 according  to mercantile practice  will  amount  to
delivery of the goods thereby represented.  The transfer  of
documents contemplated399bys. 3(b)is therefore such transfer as in law amounts  to
delivery  of  the goods.  Transfer of  documents  either  by
endorsement or delivery does complete transfer of title, but
in  the	 absence  of an indication to  that  effect  in	 the
statute,  the place where the documents are  transferred  is
not  the place of sale.	 If the view which appealed  to	 the
Commercial  Tax Officer is accepted, there is a	 possibility
of large scale evasion of tax.	For instance, the  documents
may be handed over outside India.  If documents of title  to
goods  are  handed  over by the vendor	either	directly  or
through	 his  agent to the purchaser or	 his  agent  outside
India, on the view taken by the Commercial Tax Officer, even
though	the sale has taken place in India and the goods	 are
in India, the sale would not be taxable.  This result  could
not  have  been	 contemplated by the  Legislature.   We	 are
therefore  unable  to  agree  with the	view  taken  by	 the
Commercial Tax Officer.It was urged by counsel for the State of Bihar that iron and
steel  are  commodities	 of  which  the	 storage,  sale	 and
purchase  are  controlled by the Iron  and  Steel  (Control)
Order, 1956, and all the sales which are made subject to tax
under the impugned order are those covered bys. 3(a)of the
Central	 Sales	Tax Act.  In para. 3 of	 the  petition,	 the
company	 has  set  out the practice  which  is	followed  in
supplying  steel  pursuant  to	the  orders  passed  by	 the
Controller.  It is stated that an intending purchaser has to
obtain	a permit from the Iron and Steel Controller  of	 the
region	where he carries on business and the permit is	sent
by the Provincial Controller to the Controller at  Calcutta.
The latter Officer plans the indent on the company and Bends
it to the Head Sales Office at Calcutta for compliance,	 and
the  planning of the indent in effect is a directive by	 the
Controller  to	supply	steel  to  the	intending  purchaser
subject to the company's terms and conditions.	In paras. 4,
5  and	6 of the petition, the specimen forms  of  quotation
letters and the practice followed in supplying goods to	 the
Government and Railways, to the " engineering firms and	 the
bazaar parties " are set out.  In the light of cls. 4, 5, 10
and 15 of the Iron and Steel (Control) Order, it was400urged  that all the sales effected by the company under	 the
direction of the Controller fall withins. 3, cl. (a).	 But
we do not think it necessary to express any opinion on	this
argument  at this stage, without a more complete picture  of
the modus operandi followed.The Commercial Tax Officer has taxed all the sales  effected
by  the company unders. 3, cl. (b), on the view that  sales
in which the documents of title were handed over in Calcutta
were taxable in the State of West Bengal.  The assessment is
made on two assumptions, (1) that all the sales effected  in
favour	of  West  Bengal parties  satisfied  the  conditions
prescribed  by	s. 3(b), and (2) that the  place  where	 the
documents  are	delivered, by the company through  its	Head
Sales Office to the purchaser is the place where the sale is
effected.   Neither  of these assumptions is  correct.	 The
Commercial  Tax Officer had, in our judgment,  to  ascertain
before he could order payment of tax under theCentral Sales
Tax Act, whether on the materials he was satisfied, (a) that
the goods at the time of transfer of documents of title were
in  movement  from the State of Bihar to the State  of	West
Bengal,	 (b) that the place where the sale was effected	 was
unders. 4, cl. (2), within the State of West Bengal.	 The
Commercial Tax Officer has, in our view, failed to apply the
correct	 tests	and  has  made	assumptions  which  are	 not
warranted and on a true interpretation of the provisions  of
theCentral Sales Tax Act, the order of assessment discloses
an error apparent on its face and a writ of certiorari	must
issue	quashing  the  assessment.   It	 will  be  for	 the
Commercial Tax Officer of West Bengal to re-assess the	com-
pany  in respect of transactions of sale which are  properly
taxable	 within the State of West Bengal by the	 application
of the test which we have already set out.On  this view, the rule is made absolute and it is  directed
that  a writ of certiorari will issue quashing the order  of
assessment made by the Commercial Tax Officer, Lyons  Range,
Calcutta, West Bengal.	The company will be entitled to	 its
costs of this petition.401SARKAR	J.-The petitioner was assessed to sales tax on	some
of  its	 sales by the Government of West  Bengal  under	 the
provisions of theCentral Sales Tax Act, 1956.	It  contends
that  the Government of West Bengal had no power  to  assess
tax  on	 those	sales, for, under the  Act,  they  could  be
brought	 to  tax only by the Government of  Bihar.   It	 has
filed this petition underArt. 32of the Constitution for  a
writ to quash the order of assessment made by the Government
of  West  Bengal on the ground that it	violates  the  peti-
tioner's rights under sub-cls. (f) & (g) of cl. (1) ofArt.
19to told property and carry on business.The  petitioner is a limited company carrying on a  business
of  manufacturing and selling iron and steel goods.  It	 has
its factory at Jamshedpur in Bihar and its head sales office
in Calcutta in West Bengal..On August 12, 1959, the Taxing Officer of the Government  of
West Bengal served a notice on the petitioner to produce  "a
statement of sales from Jamshedpur.....................	 the
documents relating to which were transferred in West  Bengal
or  of any other sales that have taken place unders. 3(b)
of theCentral Sales Tax Act, 1956 ". The petitioner refused
to submit the return for reasons which we shall state  later
and took the stand that the tax on the sales was  assessable
by the Government of Bihar and not by the Government of West
Bengal.	 The Taxing Officer of the Government of West Bengal
did  not accept the contention of the petitioner and in	 the
absence	 of a return by it, made a best judgment  assessment
on  October 21, 1959, assessing the petitioner to a  tax  of
Rs.  41,14,718-12  nP.	The petitioner seeks  to  have	this
order quashed.The respondents to this petition are the Government of	West
Bengal, its officer who made the assessment, the  Government
of  Bihar  and	the Union of India.  No	 relief	 is  however
claimed against the last two respondents.
The  questions	raised	by  this  petition  depend  on	 the
construction of certain provisions of theCentral Sales	 Tax
Act, 1956.The Actwas amended with effect from October  1,
1958.  This case however has to be decided402on  the	 Act  as it stood prior to the	amendment,  for	 the
period covered by the impugned order of assessment was	from
July 1, 1957 to March 31, 1958.	 It may be stated here	that
the  validity  of  the Act has not been	 challenged  by	 the
petitioner.A preliminary objection to this petition is taken on  behalf
of  the Government of West Bengal.  It is said that  as	 the
legality of the Act is not challenged, the imposition of the
tax  does  not result in any violation	of  the	 fundamental
right guaranteed byArt. 31(1)of the Constitution and	this
petition based on such alleged violation is, therefore,	 not
competent.   Such a view was indeed taken by this  Court  in
Ramji  Lal  v. Income-tax Officer, Mohindargarh	 (1).	This
case  was followed inLaxmanappa Hanumantappa  Jamkhandi  v.
Union  of  India(2).   The present  case  however  does	 not
complain of a violation of any fundamental right under	Art.31.   The  fundamental right the infringement  of  which  is
alleged	 by  the  assessment order, is	the  right  to	hold
property and carry on business underArt. 19 (1)(f)and(g).In  Kailash Nath v. The State of U. P. (3), this Court	held
that  an illegal levy of sales tax on a trader under an	 Act
the  legality  of  which was  not  challenged  violates	 his
fundamental rights underArt. 19(1)(g)and a petition  underArt.  32with respect to such violation lies.	The  earlier
case  ofRamji Lal v. Income,-tax Officer, Mohindargarh	 (1)
does  not appear to have been considered.  It  is  contended
that  the  decision  in Kailash	 Nath's	 case  (3)  requires
reconsideration.   We do not think however that the  present
is a fit case to go into the question whether the two  cases
are not reconcilable and to decide the preliminary  question
raised.	  The  point  was  taken at  a	late  stage  of	 the
proceedings  after  much  costs	 had  been  incurred.	 The
question  arising  on this petition is	further	 of  general
importance, a decision of which is desirable in the interest
of all concerned.  As there is at least one case  supporting
the  competence of the petition, we think it fit  to  decide
this  petition	on  its merits, on the footing	that  it  is
competent.(1) [1951] S.C.R. 127.		(2) [1955] 1 S.C.R. 769.
(3)  A.I.R. 1957 S.C. 790.403Now, theCentral Sales Tax Act, 1956, is an Act of the Union
Legislature.  It authorises the levy of a tax on sales	made
in  the course of inter-State trade.  It is only  with	such
sales  that  the present case is concerned.   Sales  in	 the
course	of inter-State trade are defined ins. 3of the	 Act
and  this section will be set out later.Section 6of	 the
Act  provides that every dealer shall be liable to  pay	 tax
under  the  Act on all sales made by him in  the  course  of
inter-State  trade.  That the petitioner is a dealer is	 not
in  dispute.Section 9(1)provides that the tax payable  by
any  dealer under the Act shall be levied and  collected  in
the  "	appropriate  State " by	 the  Government  of  India.Section	 9(2)provides that the  authorities  empowered  to
assess	and collect tax under the general sales tax  law  of
the " appropriate State " shall on behalf of the  Government
of  India, assess and collect the tax payable under the	 Act
and  for such purpose, exercise all	  powers  under	 its
general	 sales tax law.	 Under the provisions of sub-s.	 (3)
ofs. 9, the State collecting the tax becomes	entitled  to
retain it substantially.  It is therefore clear that the tax
is payable to the Union and is collected by a State for	 the
Union.The  contention of the petitioner before the taxing  officer
of  the Government of West Bengal may be reproduced  in	 its
own words:" We contend that all our sales from Jamshedpur are. of	 the
type mentioned inSection 3(a)of the Central Sales Tax	 Act
and  at	 the  same time some of them also  fall	 within	 the
category mentioned inSection 3(b)of the Act.	Even if	 the
sales are of the type mentioned inSection 3(b)of the	Act,
the  Appropriate  State of the place where  the	 sales	take
place or are effected, has jurisdiction to assess such sales
to Central Sales Tax.Section 4(2)lays down the principles
for  ascertaining  where the sale takes place, or  in  other
words, the situs of the sale.  This section creates a legal
fiction for ascertaining the situs of the sale.
So  far	 as  our  inter-State  sales  from  Jamshedpur	 are
concerned  the	situs of such sales will always	 be  in	 the
State of Bihar as the goods will be in Bihar either52404at  the time of contract of sale (ascertained goods)  or  at
the   time   of	  their	 appropriation	 to   the   contract
(unascertained	goods).	  We  have  accordingly	 filed	 our
returns of sales made in the course of inter-State trade  or
commerce   from	  Jamshedpur  with  the	 Bihar	 Sales	 tax
Authorities under theCentral Sales Tax Act, 1956, and	have
paid to them the Tax on the basis of these returns ".
The Taxing Officer of the Government of West Bengal did	 not
accept the petitioner's contention.  He held :
"  In  the case of sale u/s 3(b) no property  in  the  goods
passes	unless	the documents of title to goods are  in	 the
hands of the buyer.  In such a case the " Appropriate  State
" to levy the tax should be that State in which the sale has
been  effected; or, in other words, that State in which	 the
documents  of  title to goods have been transferred  to	 the
buyer.In the above circumstances, it is clear that West Bengal  is
the  " Appropriate State " to levy tax on inter-State  sales
of the dealer effected by transfer of documents of title  to
goods in West Bengal.  In this case, it should be remembered
thatsection 3(b)refers to transfer of documents  and	 not
only to transfer of documents by endorsement.  Thus, even if
the documents are in the name of the buyer as consignee	 but
these are physically transferred to the buyer in West Bengal
then  that  sale is taxable in	West Bengal.   In  case	 of
goods  consigned  to  " Self " there  is  no  question	that
delivery  to the railways cannot be constituted as  delivery
to the buyer".He also held that:"  The	dealer	has said thatsection  4(2)lays  down	 the
principles for ascertaining where the sale in the course  of
inter-State  trade  takes  place.  In  other  words,  the  "
Appropriate State " (to levy the tax on the sales) u/s 9  of
theCentral Act(prior to its amendment with effect from  1-
10-58) should be determined bysection 4(2).  In my opinion,
this is an incorrect reading of the law.  Each ofsection  3andsection 4405deals	with   quite  independent   sphere   of	  commercial
transactions".Finally,  he  made  the best  judgment	assessment,  earlier
mentioned, remarking that:" The dealer has himself admitted that he has some sales u/s
3(b).  From my experience of examining the books of accounts
of  the	 dealer for some earlier years I am of	the  opinion
that  a	 very  substantial portion of the  total  sales	 are
effected  by  transfer	of documents in	 West  Bengal.	 The
dealer	has refused to comply with my direction to submit  a
statement  of  such sales.  I have, therefore,	to  make  an
estimate.On  examining the records of the dealer under the State	 law
and   keeping  in  view	 the  fact  that  there	  had	been
considerable expansion of sales of iron and steel in  recent
years	1  estimate  the  turnover  during  the	 period	  of
assessment  to	be Rs. 9 crores; i.e., an average of  Rs.  1
crore per month ".Now  in	 this case the petitioner's complaint  is  not	that
there  should not have been a best judgment assessment.	  It
does not say that  assessment is arbitrary or, for any other
reason,	 unfair.  Its point is that the Government  of	West
Bengal	could  not  tax a sale where goods  were  under	 the
contract of sale moved from Bihar to Bengal even though	 the
documents  of  title to the goods sold were  transferred  in
Bengal,	 such sales being taxable only by the Government  of
Bihar.It  is clear from what we have said that the  Government  of
West  Bengal purported to tax sales unders. 3(b); it  taxed
sales where during their movement from Bihar to Bengal,	 the
property  in  the goods sold passed, by a transfer  in	West
Bengal	of  the documents of title to them.   Two  questions
arise, namely, what is a sale unders. 3(b)and which is the
" appropriate State " to tax such sales ?We  take up the first question now.  In order to decide	 it,
we have to considers. 3as a whole.  The section, so far as
material, is in these terms:Section	 3:-A sale or purchase of goods shall be  deemed  to
take place in the course of inter-State trade or commerce if
the sale or purchase-406(a)  occasions	the  movement of goods	from  one  State  to
another ; or(b)  is effected by a transfer of documents of title to	 the
goods during their movement from one State to another.
The  first thing that strikes us is that the section has  to
be so construed that the two clauses in it are made mutually
exclusive.  It seems clear that it was not contemplated that
a  sale can fall within both the clauses.  If that were	 not
so, there might be two " appropriate States " in respect  of
it,  one being the State from which the goods were moved  by
reason of the sale and the other being another State  within
which the sale was effected by the transfer of documents  of
title  during the movement of the goods sold from one  State
to  another.  In such a case, each of the two "	 appropriate
States	"  would  be entitled to collect the  tax  with	 the
result	that the same sale would be taxed twice	 over.	 The
learned	 counsel  for  the State of Bihar  was	inclined  to
contend, no doubt as an alternative argument, that  could be
done.  We do not think that the Act intended such a  result.
We proceed now to state our reasons for this view.The  Actimposes tax on sales in the course  of  interState
trade.	 It is an Act of the Union legislature.	  Under	 the
Constitution  the  State legislatures have no power  to	 tax
such sales and only the Union Legislature can do so.  It  is
well  recognised  that the power to tax sales  made  in	 the
course	of  inter-State trade has been denied to  the  State
Legislatures with the object of preventing multiple taxation
of  the same sale by different States resulting in  hardship
to  the	 ultimate consumer: seeState of  Bombay  v.  United
Motors	(India) Ltd.(1) andBengal Immunity Co.	 Ltd.  v.The
State  of  Bihar(2).  Since these cases were  decided,	 the
Constitution has no doubt been amended, but the observations
made in them still apply.  This being so, the Act could	 not
have intended to tax the same sale twice.But  apart  from this consideration of	a  somewhat  general
nature, the provisions of the Act plainly make
(1) [1953] S.C.R. 1069.(2) [1955] 2 S.C.R. 603.407it impossible to levy two taxes on the same sale.  Unders.
8(1),  the  tax is a certain percentage of  the	 dealer's  "
turnover ".Section 2(j)defines " turnover " as meaning the
aggregate  of  the sale prices in respect  of  the  dealer's
sales.	So the tax is a percentage of the sale price and  as
each  sale  produces one price, it follows that	 it  can  be
taxed  only  once.  Again,s. 9by providing  that  the	 tax
shall  be  collected  in the " appropriate State  "  by	 the
Government of India, plainly indicates that there is one tax
payable to the Government of India which is collected by one
State only.Section 3by the use of the word " or " between
cls.  (a) and (b) in it also suggests that the	clauses	 are
exclusive of each other.One  sale  then cannot be taxed twice.	A sale	cannot	fall
under both cl. (a) and cl. (b) ofs. 3, for then it would be
liable to tax twice.  Clauses (a) and (b) are hence mutually
exclusive.   Keeping  this basic consideration in  mind,  we
proceed to construes. 3.We  take cl. (a) ofs. 3first.	 That clause contemplates  a
sale which occasions the movement of goods from one State to
another.   The words ' sale occasions the  movement'  should
create	no difficulty.	It is apparent from the	 explanation
ins. 2(a)which will be set out later, that they mean moved
by reason of the sale'.	 The question then arises, when does
a sale occasion the movement of goods sold ? It seems  clear
to  us	that a sale can occasion the movement of  the  goods
sold only when the terms of the sale provide that the  goods
would be moved; in other words, a sale occasions a  movement
of goods when the contract of sale so provides.
We turn now to the sale contemplated by el. (b) ofs.  3.
That is a sale effected by a transfer of documents of  title
to  the goods  during their movement  from  one	 State	to
another.   What	 then is a sale effected by  a	transfer  of
documents  of  title ? In our view, it can only	 be  a	sale
where the property in the goods sold is passed by a transfer
of documents of title.	It is well known that in many  cases
of  sale,  property in the goods sold is  transferred  by  a
transfer  of documents of title to them.  It has  been	said
that a sale has several408elements, namely, agreement to sell, transfer of property in
the goods sold, payment of price, delivery of the goods	 and
so  forth:  seeState, of Bombay v.  United  Motors  (India)
Ltd.(1).  It seems to us to be inappropriate to talk of	 any
of  these elements of sale being effected by a	transfer  of
documents  of title, other than the element of	transfer  of
property.  Thus, for example, the contract of sale cannot be
effected by the transfer of documents of title, neither	 the
payment	 of  price.  A transfer of documents  of  title	 may
perhaps	 effect	 a delivery of the goods if the	 parties  so
agree.	 But it seems to us that in defining a sale  in	 the
course of inter-State trade in a statute purporting to tax a
sale,  that is a transaction in which property in the  goods
passed, the legislature was not thinking only of delivery of
goods.	 It  does  not	appear to  us  to  be  a  reasonable
construction of the words " sale is effected ' to hold	that
they  mean delivery of the thing sold.	Therefore, we  think
that cl. (b) refers only to sales where transfer of property
in  the goods sold takes place by the transfer of  documents
of  title  to them during their movement from one  State  to
another.We have then come to this that cl. (a) ofs. 3contemplates
a sale where the contract of sale occasions the movement  of
the  goods  sold  and  cl. (b), a  sale	 where	transfer  of
property  in  the goods sold is effected by  a	transfer  of
documents  of title to them.  Of course, in the first  case,
the movement of the goods must be from one State to  another
and   in  the  second,	the  documents	of  title  must	  be
transferred during such movement.Now  it	 will  be  apparent  that  if  this  was  the	full
construction  of  the  two clauses, then  they	would  often
overlap.   This,  as earlier stated, was not  intended.	  We
have  to  narrow  down the construction so as  to  make	 the
clauses	 mutually exclusive.  There may be sales  under	 the
terms of which the goods have to be moved from one State  to
another.  All such sales would come within cl. (a).  But  it
may  so happen that in some of these sales, the property  in
the goods passes by a transfer of document of title to	them
during their
(1)  [1953] S.C.R. 1069.409movement.   Such sales would fall within cl. (b)  also.	  To
avoid  this result we have to exclude from el. (a)  such  of
the sales coming under it in which the property in the goods
passes	by a transfer of documents of title to	them  during
their  movement.  In other words, where a sale	comes  under
both the clauses, it has to be hold to fall under el. (b).
We,  therefore,	 think	that  the  two	clauses	 should	  be
construed  in the following way: Clause (a)  contemplates  a
sale  where  under the contract of sale the goods  sold	 are
moved from one State to another, provided however that	such
a  sale will not come under cl. (a) but fall under el.	(b)
if the property in the goods sold is passed by a transfer of
the  documents of title to them during their  movement	from
one  State  to	another.  Clause (b),  on  the	other  hand,
contemplates a sale where the property in the goods sold  is
passed	by a transfer of documents of title to	them  during
their movement from one State to another.The  next question is which State can collect the tax  on  a
sale  falling under cl. (b) ofs. 3, construing that  clause
in the sense that we have done earlier. In other words, the
question  in  this  case  is: Would West  Bengal  be  the  "
appropriate State " to tax a sale where the property in	 the
goods sold passed from the seller to the buyer by a transfer
in  West  Bengal of the documents of title  to	them  during
their movement from Bihar to West Bengal ? Again, to put  it
shortly,  in the case of sale under el. (b) ofs. 3, is	 the
State where the transfer of documents of title takes  place,
the  "appropriate State" to tax the sale?  The	West  Bengal
Government  thought  it	 was.  We think	 that  this  is	 the
correct view to take.Now  the  " appropriate State " which alone can unders.  9levy  and collect the tax under the Act has been defined  in
s. 2(a) which is in these terms:Section	 2.-In	this  Act,  unless  the	 context   otherwise
requires,--(a)  " appropriate State " means-(i)  in	 relation to a dealer who has one or more places  of
business situate in the same State, that State;410(ii) in	 relation to a dealer who has one or more places  of
business situate in different States, every such State	with
respect	 to the place or places of business  situate  within
its territory ;Explanation.-" Place of business " means-(i)  in the case of a sale of goods in the course of  inter-
State trade or commerce falling within clause (a) ofsection
3, the place from which the goods have been moved by  reason
of such sale,(ii) in the case of any such sale falling within clause	 (b)
ofs. 3, the place where the sale is effected ;
So   the  "  appropriate  State	 "  is	that  within   whose
territories the dealer has his place of business.  The place
of  business  has  however to be decided  in  each  case  by
reference  to  the  kind of sale.  The	effect	ofs.	2(a)appears to be this: If the sale is of the kind mentioned  in
cl.  (a)  ofs. 3, the " appropriate State "  is  that	from
which the goods have been moved by reason of the contract of
sale, while if the sale is of the kind mentioned in cl.	 (b)
ofs. 3, the " appropriate State " is that " where the	sale
is effected ".We are in this case concerned only with sales under el.	 (b)
ofs. 3, and the " appropriate State " in respect of such  a
sale  has to be decided from cl. (ii) of the Explanation  in
s.  2(a).   Under that clause the " appropriate State  "  in
respect	 of  such a sale is the State " where  the  sale  is
effected ".  The question is, does this definition by itself
give  sufficient  guidance to ascertain	 the  "	 appropriate
State " ?The learned counsel for the State of Bihar contends that the
words  "  where the sale is effected " do not  indicate	 any
place  of  sale	 and  are not intended	to  indicate  the  "
appropriate State ". The " appropriate State ", according to
him,  has  to  be decided by resort tos.  42)  which	 was
intended  to be explanatory of Explanation (ii) ins.  2(a).
We  will considers. 4(2)a little later.  But before we  do
that, let us examine the argument that the words " where the
sale is effected " in cl. (ii) of the explanation ins. 2(a)do not indicate any place or the " appropriate State ".
The  learned  counsel  gave several reasons  why  the  words
"where the sale is effected" in cl. (ii) of the411Explanation ins. 2(a)cannot indicate any place.  First, he
referred  to  certain  observations inState  of  Bombay  v.
United	Motors	(India)	 Ltd. (1)  indicating  that  it	 was
difficult  to localise, that is, to fix the place  where,  a
sale  in  the course of inter-State trade takes	 place.	  He
also  said  that transfer of property is the creation  of  a
jural  relation and it is not possible to say where a  jural
relation   is	created.   Lastly,  he	 referred   to	 the
observations of Lord Loreburn, L. C., in Badische Anilin Und
Soda  Fabrik  v. Hickson (2) that, " if you must  decide  in
what  country  an appropriation of goods  by  consent  takes
place,	it takes place not where the consent is	 given,	 but
where  the  goods are at the time situate  ".  Therefore  he
contended  that the words " where the sale is effected "  do
not point to any particular place of sale.In our opinion, these reasons have no application to a case,
where a statute fixes the place of sale.  The difficulty  in
the cases mentioned above was not that there was no place of
sale  at all, sale being a jural concept, but which  of	 the
several	 places in which a sale could be said to have  taken
place,	was the correct one to select.	No  such  difficulty
arises	where the statute fixes the place of sale.  That  is
what  the  Act before us admittedly purports to do,  in	 one
view  by cl. (ii) of the Explanation ins. 2(a)and  in	 the
other view bys. 4(2).Clause	(ii) of that Explanation says in effect that in	 the
case  of  any  sale  falling within cl.	 (b)  ofs.  3the
appropriate  State  shall  be the State where  the  sale  is
effected.  Now, a sale unders. 3(b)is a sale effected " by
a transfer of documents of title.  The effect " is the sale;
the  mode  in which the " effect " is produced is by  the  "
transfer  of documents of title".  As soon as this mode	 has
completed  itself the " effect " has been produced.   It  is
simple syllogism that the place where the mode is completed,
that is, the transfer of documents of title takes place,  is
the place where the effect is produced, that is, the sale is
effected.   The act constituting the mode of  effecting	 the
sale  being prescribed, the sale must be taken to have	been
effected where
(1) [1953] S.C.R. 1069.	       (2) [1906] A.C. 419,421.53412that act is performed.	Clause (ii) of the Explanation ins.
2(a),  therefore,  itself  fixes the place of  sale  and  no
question  of  any difficulty in fixing it  arises.   In	 our
view, a sale contemplated bys. 3(b)is effected within	 the
State in which the documents of title to the goods sold	 are
transferred resulting in a transfer of the property in	them
;  that State is the " appropriate State in respect of	such
sale.In  this view of the matter no question of resorting  tos.
4(2)for  fixing the place where a sale under	s.  3(b)  is
effected,  arises.  The place of that sale is fixed  by	 el.(ii) of the explanation ins. 2(a)itself.It  also  appears  to us to be	absolutely  clear  that	 the
purpose	 ofs. 4(2)was not to fix the place where  a	sale
unders.  3(b)can be said to	 have  taken  effect.	That
section is in these terms:Section 4. When is a sale or purchase of goods said to	take
place outside a State.-(1)  Subject to the provisions contained insection 3,	when
a sale or purchase of goods is determined in accordance with
sub-section  (2) to take place inside a State, such sale  or
purchase  shall	 be deemed to have taken place	outside	 all
other States.(2)  A	sale  or purchase of goods shall be deemed  to	take
place inside a State if the goods are within the State-(a)  in	 the case of specific or ascertained goods,  at	 the
time the contract of sale is made; and(b)  in	 the case of unascertained or future goods,  at	 the
time  of their appropriation to the contract of sale by	 the
seller or by the buyer, whether assent of the other party is
prior or subsequent to such appropriation.
First,	what the learned counsel for the petitioner and	 the
State of Bihar say is thats. 4(2)is really an	 explanation
to  cl. (ii) of the Explanation ins. 2(a); el. (ii) of	 the
Explanation ins. 2(a)does not say where a sale is effected
and the " place " is explained by sub-sec. (2) ofs. 4. Now,
sub-sec.  (2) ofs. 4does not purport to be an	 explanation
to  clause (ii) of the explanation ins. 2(a); it  does	 not
refer  tos. 2(a)at all.  It would be a  strange  mode  of
enacting a statute to have413an  explanation	 to  another explanation  and  that  too  in
another	 part of the statute dealing, as we shall  presently
show, with a different matter.	Further sub-cl. (ii) of	 the
Explanation  ins. 2(a)specifies the place of business	 and
s.  4(2)  specifies  a State; so the  latter  cannot  be  an
explanation of the former.Secondlys. 4(2)states when a sale shall be deemed to	take
place  " inside a State ". In order however to say  where  a
sale  takes  place in the course of interState trade  it  is
inappropriate to talk of it as taking place " inside a State
".  A sale in the course of interState trade from  its	very
nature,	 has  nothing to do with sales inside or  outside  a
State.	 It  contemplates commercial activities	 which	take
place in more than one State.Thirdly,s. 4is not really defining when a sale  shall  be
deemed	to take place inside a State.  It is  only  defining
when  a sale shall be deemed to take place outside a  State.
It does so by saying that when a sale is to be deemed to  be
inside	any State under sub-see. (2), it shall be deemed  to
have taken place outside all other States.  Sub-section	 (2)
provides when a sale shall be deemed to take place inside  a
State only for the purpose of showing that it shall then  be
deemed	to have then taken place outside all  other  States,
and  for no other purpose.  This is clear from	the  section
itself and is made further clear by the heading to the	sec-
tion.  It seems to us that the heading is really a  preamble
to  the	 section giving a key to its interpretation  as	 was
found to be the case in Martins v. Fowler (1).
Fourthly,s. 4is expressly made subject tos. 3. This	 can
only mean that in case any conflict between the two sections
appears,s. 3would prevail.  Now these two sections  define
two  kinds of sale, namely, a sale in the course  of  inter-
State  trade and a sale taking place outside a State.  If  a
sale  happens to come under both definitions, it would	have
to be taken as a sale in the course of inter-State trade for
s. 4 has been made subject tos. 3. That being so, it  would
be  impossible to hold thats. 4(2)indicates where  a	sale
failing unders. 3(b)is to be held to have been effected.
Lastly it seems clear to us thats. 4was enacted
(1)  [1926] A. C. 746, 750.414under the power conferred on the Parliament by.Art. 286(2)to  formulate principles for determining when a	 sale  takes
place  "  outside a State ", the State	legislatures  having
been  prevented by el. (1) of that Article from passing	 any
law  imposing  tax  on such a sale.  This is  clear  from  a
consideration  ofss. 3,4and5which	together  constitute
Chapter II of the Act.Section 5states when a sale is said
to take place in the course of export or import.  The  power
to  enact  this section is also derived	 fromArt.  286(2).Section	 3formulates the principles for determining when  a
sale  is  said to take place in the  course  of	 inter-State
trade  and  it is enacted under the power for  that  purpose
contained  inArt. 269(3).The enactments in that  Chapter,
as  its heading shows, were for " formulation of  principles
for determining when a sale or purchase of goods takes place
in the course of inter-State trade, or outside a State or in
the  course of export or import" and were made	under  Arts.
269(3)	and 286(2), as already stated.	We think that it  is
legitimate  to	refer  to  the heading	of  Chapter  11	 for
ascertaining  the  intention  of  the  legislature  on	 the
principles  stated  by	the Judicial  Committee	 in  Toronto
Corporation v. Toronto Railway(1) in these words:
"  This	 clause is the last of a fasciculus,  of  which	 the
heading	 is " Track, & c., and Railways ", and, as was	held
in  Hammersmith Ry.  Co. v. Brand, such a heading is  to  be
regarded  as  giving the key to the  interpretation  of	 the
clauses ranged under it, unless the wording is	inconsistent
with such interpretation ".  The interpretation that we	 put
on  s,	4  in  the light of  the  heading,  is	clearly	 not
inconsistent  with  the	 wording of  that  section.   It  is
admitted  that	s.  5  has  no	connection  with  the  other
provisions  in	the  Act and is	 clearly  only	laying	down
principles  for determining when a sale can be said to	have
taken place in the course of import of goods into or  export
of goods out of, India.	 It would be legitimate to hold that
similarlys. 4was enacted only for the purpose of  formula-
ting principles for determining when a sale is said to	take
place  outside a State and not for any other  purpose.	 For
all these reasons, we hold that sub-s. (2) of
(1)  [1907] A. C. 315, 324415s.   4	was  not  enacted  for determining  which  is  an  "
appropriate State " to collect the tax in the case of a sale
falling under cl. (b) ofs. 3.It  was argued on behalf of the Government of Bihar that  in
any case the sales of the petitioner from Jamshedpur do	 not
come under el. (b) ofs. 3because all such sales were	made
pursuant to the permit granted under the provisions of	Iron
&  Steel (Control) Order, 1956, issued under  the  Essential
Supplies  Act,	1955,  the directions in  which	 permit	 the
petitioner was bound to carry out.  It appears that iron and
steel being controlled commodities, they could not under the
provisions  of the Act and Order aforesaid, be sold  without
the  permission	 of  the Iron & Steel  Controller.   It	 was
contended  that	 when on a contract made  pursuant  to	such
permission, the petitioner loaded the goods into the railway
wagons	at Jamshedpur, the property in them passed unders.
23(1)of the Sale of Goods Act to the purchaser, because, in
view  of the Iron & Steel (Control) Order, 1956,  the  goods
became	unconditionally appropriated to the contract by	 the
seller	with  the  assent of the buyer.	 The  case  ofCom-
missioner  of Sales Tax, Bihar v. New India Sugar Mills(1)
was cited as authority for this view.  This case was decided
under  a different Order.  We do not propose to go into	 the
question  whether  in  any  particular	sale  property	 was
transferred  from the seller to the buyer or how  and  when.
That  point  can  be taken  before  the	 appropriate  taxing
authorities.It appears to us that the Taxing Officer of the West  Bengal
Government  took the same view ofs. 3(b)as we	 have  done.
He  said  that	in the case of a sale unders.	 3(b)"  no
property  in the goods passes unless the documents of  title
to  the	 goods	are in the hands of the	 buyer".   This,  of
course, means that in the case of a sale under cl. (b) ofs.
3the property in the goods sold passes by the transfer  of
documents of title to them.  The Taxing Officer was  further
clearly	 contemplating	the transfer of documents  of  title
taking	 place	during	the  movement  of  the	goods	from
Jamshedpur  to places in West Bengal.  So far, it  seems  to
us, his view is correct and unexceptionable.  He
(1)  10 Sales Tax Cases 74.416however proceeded to state that " even if the documents	 are
in  the	 name  of  the buyer  as  consignee  but  these	 are
physically  transferred	 to the buyer in West  Bengal,	then
that  sale is taxable in West Bengal ". We think  that	this
was  not a correct view to take.  The transfer of  documents
of  title  to the goods sold can pass the property  in	them
only  if  the parties agree that that would be	the  result.
Therefore, the Taxing Officer of the West Bengal  Government
had further to bear in mind the question whether the parties
had agreed that physical delivery of the documents of  title
to  the goods would pass the property in them.	He does	 not
seem  to have done this.  In the other case also  where	 the
documents  of  title  are transferred  to  the	buyer  after
endorsement,  the same test has to be kept in mind,  namely,
that such transfer would pass the property in the goods only
if  the parties agreed that   would happen.   It,  therefore,
seems  to  us  that  the  West	Bengal	Government's  Taxing
Officers  order may not have been completely  in  consonance
withs. 3(b).	In so far as it purported to levy a  tax  on
sales  where the documents of title are already in the	name
of  the buyer simply because such documents had been  trans-
ferred	in West Bengal, it may have gone outside the  limits
ofs.	3(b).  The order of assessment made  by	 the  Taxing
Officer	 of  the Government of West Bengal in this  case  is
hence liable to be set aside.We  accordingly	 set  aside the order  made  by	 the  Taxing
Officer	 of  the Government of West Bengal  on	October	 21,
1959,  assessing the petitioner to a tax of  Rs.  41,14,718-
12nP.	The Government of West Bengal will be at liberty  to
proceed	  to  assess  the  tax	afresh	in  terms   of	 the
interpretation put ons. 3by us in this judgment.
We do not think it fit to make any order as to the costs  of
this petition.BY COURT: In view of the majority judgment of the Court, the
petition  is allowed with costs, and it is directed  that  a
writ  of  certiorari  will  issue  quashing  the  order	  of
assessment made by the Commercial Tax Officer, Lyons  Range,
Calcutta.Petition allowed.417