Take notes as you read a judgment using ourVirtual Legal Assistantand get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out ourPremium Memberservices --Free for one month.Supreme Court of IndiaThe Atlas Cycle Industries, Ltd. ... vs Their Workmen on 8 February, 1962Equivalent citations: 1962 AIR 1100, 1962 SCR  Supl. (3)  89Author: T V AiyyarBench: Aiyyar, T.L. VenkataramaPETITIONER:
THE ATLAS CYCLE INDUSTRIES, LTD. SONEPAT

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
THEIR WORKMEN

DATE OF JUDGMENT:
08/02/1962

BENCH:
AIYYAR, T.L. VENKATARAMA
BENCH:
AIYYAR, T.L. VENKATARAMA
SINHA, BHUVNESHWAR P.(CJ)
SUBBARAO, K.
AYYANGAR, N. RAJAGOPALA
MUDHOLKAR, J.R.

CITATION:
 1962 AIR 1100		  1962 SCR  Supl. (3)  89
 CITATOR INFO :
 R	    1992 SC1277	 (37,91)


ACT:
Industrial  Dispute-Constitution of  Tribunal-Qualifications
of  members-"Qualified for appointment as a Judge of a	High
Court", meaning of-Validity of Reference-Industrial Disputes
(Punjab	  Amendment)  Act,  1957(Punj.8	 of  1957),s.	  3-Industrial  Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947),s. 7(3)	(c)-
Constitution of India, Arts.14, 165,217.



HEADNOTE:
On  February  14, 1953, the Government	of  Punjab  referred
certain	 disputes  between  the appellant  company  and	 its
workmen	 to the Industrial Tribunal which had  been  consti-
tuted on August 29, 1953, by a notification issued unders.
7of the industrialDisputes Act, 1947, by which G, an Advo-
cate,  was appointed as the Industrial Tribunal for  Punjab.
When  the  reference was pending the Act was  amended.The
Amendment Actinter alia repealeds. 7of the principal	 Act
and replaced it byss. 7A,7Band7C, and bys. 30provided
for  a saving clause in respect of the	proceedings  pending
before the Tribunal constituted under the principal Act.  On
April 19, 1957, the Punjab Government issued a	notification
unders.  7of  the Act ands. 30of	 the  Amendment	 Act
extending  the	life of the Tribunal constituted  under	 the
repealeds.  7and also extending the term  of  G  as	 the
member.	  On the same date another Notification	 was  issued
unders.  7Aof the Act constituting a  new  Tribunal	 and
appointing  G as the Presiding Officer up to June  3,  1957.
Unders. 70(b) the age of retirement for members was  fixed
at  sixty  five	 and under that provision G  would  have  to
retire	by June 3, 1957.  The Punjab  Government  intervened
and  passed theIndustrial Disputes (Punjab Amendment)	Act,
1957,  raising	the age of retirement of  members  to  sixty
seven  years.	After  G had retired on June  3,  1959,	 the
Punjab	Government issued a notification appointing  another
person as the Presiding Officer of the Industrial Tribunal.
The  appellant challenged the legality of the  reference  on
the grounds, inter alia, (1) that G was not qualified to  be
appointed to the Tribunal unders. 7(3) (c) of the Act,  as
he was over sixty years and, therefore, the reference to him
dated
90
February 14, 1955, was incompetent, and (2) that the  Indus-
trial Disputes (Punjab Amendment) Act, 1937, was passed with
a  view to benefit a single individual, G,  and,  therefore,
was void as offendingArt. 14of the Constitution of India.
Held,  (1)s. 7(3)(c)of the Industrial Disputes Act,  1947,
did  not  import any qualification based on the age  of	 the
person	to  be appointed, and that the appointment of  G  on
August 29, 1953, was valid under that section.
On the true Construction ofArt. 217of the Constitution  of
India,	the  prescription  of age  therein  is	a  condition
attached to the duration of the office and not a "qualifica-
tion" for appointment to it.
G.D.  Karkare v. T.L. Shevde, I.L.R. [1952] Nag. 409  andPrabhudayal  v.	 State of Punjab, A. I. R. 1959	 Punj.	460,
approved.
(2)  theIndustrial Disputes (Punjab Amendment) Act,1957,not
contraveneArt. 14of the Constitution, because thoughthe
occasion which inspired the enactment of the statutemight
be  to benefit an individual, it was of general	 application
and could not therefore be held to be discriminatory.
Ameerunissa v. Mehboob,[1953] S.C.R. 404, distinguished.



JUDGMENT:CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 188 of 1961.
Appeal	by special leave from the judgment and	order  dated
September  11,1959,  of	 the  Industrial  Tribunal,  Punjab,
Patiala in Reference No. 30 of 1957.G.S. Pathak, J. B. Dadachanji, O. C. Mathur and	 Ravinder
Narain, for the appellants.Bawa   Shivcharan   Singh  and	Janardan  Slwrma   for	 the
respondents.1962.	February 8. The Judgment of the Court was  delivered
by
VENKITARAMA  AIYAR,  J.-This is an appeal by  special  leave
against the Order of the Industrial Tribunal, Punjab,  dated
September 11, 1959, in Reference No. 30 of 1957,  overruling
certain	 preliminary objections raised by the  appellant  to
the91jurisdiction  of  the Tribunal to hear the  reference.	 The
facts  are  that  on February 14,,1955,	 the  Government  of
Punjab referred unders. 10(1)(c)of the Industrial Disputes
Act,  1947,  hereinafter referred to as "the  Act",  certain
disputes  between the appellant and the respondents  to	 the
Industrial  Tribunal Punjab, Jullundur,	 for  adjudication.'
That was numbered as Reference No. 3 of 1955.  This Tribunal
had  been constituted on August 29, 1953, by a	Notification
issued by the Government of Punjab, which is as follows
	      "In  exercise  of the powers  conferred  undersection 7of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947
	      (Act XIV of 1947), the Governor of Punjab,  in
	      consultation  with the Punjab High  Court,  is
	      pleased  to appoint Shri Avtar  Narain  Gujral
	      'Advocate, as Industrial Tribunal'for Punjab."
The  main  contention pressed before us on  %behalf  of	 the
appellant is that Shri A.N. Gujral was 'not qualified  under
s.  7(3)(c)  of the Act under which  the  Notification	was
issued to be appointed as Tribunal on August 29, 1953, as he
was  very sixty years of age on that date, having been	born on	 June 4, 1
892, and that there was therefore no  Tribunal
validly	 constituted in existence, and that  in	 consequence
the  reference, to that so-called Tribunal on  February	 14,
55, was wholly inoperative.While  Reference  No.  3  of 1955  was	pending	 before	 the
Tribunal,  the	provisions of theIndustrial  Disputes	Act,
1947, were amended by the Industrial Dispute (Amendment	 andMiscellaneous  Provisions) Act, 1956 (Act No. 36  of  1956),
which came into force on March 10, 1957.This Amendment Actrepealeds. 7of the principal Act, and replace it  byss.
7A,7Band7C.Section 30of the Amendment Act contains  a
saving as regards proceedings in relation to any  industrial
dispute which had been pending before a Tribunal constituted
under the principal Act.  Acting under this section, the92Punjab	Government issued on April 19, 1957,  the  following
Notification :-"No. 4194-0.  Lab-57/652-RA In continuation of
	      Punjab  Government Memorandum No.	 3078-C-Lab-
	      57/4224,	dated the 1st/llth March, 1957,	 and
	      in exercise of the powers conferred bysection
	      7of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, as  in
	      force   before   the   commencement   of	 the
	      Industrial     Disputes	  (Amendment	 andMiscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1956, read withSection  30of the latter Act and  all  other
	      powers   enabling	 him  in  this	behalf	 the
	      Governor of Punjab is pleased to extend-(a)the   period  for  which   the	  Industrial
	      Tribunal,	 Punjab, Jullundur, is	constituted,
	      and(b)the term of appointment of the Role  Member
	      thereof.up  to the last day of October, 1957, or	such
	      date   as	 the  proceedings  in  relation	  to
	      industrial   disputes  pending  in  the	said
	      Tribunal	immediately before the	10th  March,
	      1957, are disposed of, whichever is earlier."To  put it briefly, this Notification extended the  life  of
the  Tribunal constituted under the repealeds. 7,  for	 the
period specified therein, and it also continued the term  of
Shri A,N.  Gujral, as a Member thereof, for the said period.
The  contention	 of  the appellant with	 reference  to	this
Notification  is  that	s. 30 of Act 36	 of  1956  does	 not
authorise  the	appointment  of a  Member  to  the  Tribunal
constituted unders. 7, and that the Notification in so	 far
as  it	continued  Sbri	 A.N. Gujral. as  a  Member  of	 the
Tribunal  after his term of office had expired on  Mach	 10,
1957, was unauthorised and void.93On the same date on which the above Notification was issued,
that is on April 19, 1957, the Government of Punjab issued a
Notification  unders. 7Aof the Act of which  the  relevant
portion is as follows :--"No.  4194-C-Lab-57/66t-RA-In exercise of	 the
	      powers   conferred  bySection  7Aof	 the
	      Industrial Disputes Act, 1917, as inserted  bysection	4of	 the   Industrial   Disputes
			    (Amendment	andMiscellaneous Provisions)  Act,
	      1956,  (No. 36 of 1956), and all other  powers
	      enabling	him in this behalf, the Governor  of
	      Punjab is pleased to constitute an  Industrial
	      Tribunal with Headquarters at Jullundur and to
	      appoint Shri Avtar Narain Gujral, B.A., LL.B.,
	      as its Presiding Officer with effect from	 the
	      date  of the publication of this	notification
	      in the Official Gazette up to 3rd June, 1957."It   will   be	noticed	 that  this   Notification   firstly
constituted  a now Tribunal being the  Industrial  Tribunal,
Jullundur,  and secondly it appointed Shri A. N.  Gujral  as
its Presiding Officer 'up to June 3, 1957.  The significance
of  that  date	is  that, unders. 7C(b)  enacted  by	 theAmendment  Act, 1956, the age of retirement for members	 was
fixed  at  sixty-five, and under that provision,  Shri	A.N.
Gujral	would  have to retire on June 3, 1957.	 The  Punjab
Legislature  intervened	 at  this  stage  and  enacted	 two
statutes which are material for the present dispute.  One of
them  was theIndustrial Disputes (Punjab Amendment)  Act8
of.  1957.Section 3of this Act amendeds. 7C(b)  of	 the
principal Act by substituting for the words "he has attained
the age of sixty-five years", the words "he has attained the
the  age of sixty-seven years".	 Thus the age of  retirement
was  raised to sixty-seven years.  By the operation of	this
Act, the tenure of Shri A. N. Gujral could be extended from94June 3, 1957 to June 3, 1959, and that in fact was done by a
number	of  Notifications  issued from time  to	 time.	 The
appellant  contends  that this legislation was	intended  to
benefit	 a  single  individual	Shri  A.N.  Gujral,  and  is
therefore  void	 as offendingArt. 14of  the  Constitution.
The  result, according to the appellant, is that after	June
3,  1957,  there was no one validly holding  the  office  of
Member of the Industrial Tribunal.The  second statute enacted by the Punjab Government is	 the
Industrial Disputes (Amendment and Miscellaneous Provisions)
(Punjab Amendment) Act 9 of 1957.  It introduced ins. 30of
the Amendment Act, 1956, a new sub s. (2) conferring on	 the
,State	 Government  authority	to  re-constitute   Tribunal
established  under theIndustrial Disputes Act, 1947,  where
those  Tribunals had come to an end and there  were  matters
pending	 before	 them for adjudication.	 Going back  to	 the
Tribunal  which was constituted under the repealeds.  7of
the  Act it will be remembered that a Notification had	been
issued on April 19, 1957, unders. 30of the Amendment	Act,
1956,  keeping it alive until the pending matters were	dis-
posed  of or until October 31, 1957, whichever was  earlier.
The  expectation that the proceedings before  that  Tribunal
would  be completed by that date was however,  not  realised
and therefore acting under s., 33B (1) of the Act, ands. 30of the Amendment Act 1956, as further amended byPunjab Act,
9  of 1957. the Government of Punjab issued on	October	 31,
1957 a Notification transferring the matters pending  before
the old Tribunal constituted unders. 7to the new  Tribunal
constituted  on April 19, 1957, unders. 7A.  In  accordance
with  this  Notification,  Reference  No.  3  of  1955	 was
transferred to the new Tribunal and was renumbered as 30  of
1957.	The contentions urged by the appellant against	this
order  of transfer are, firstly, that the Tribunal to  which
the transfer had been made was not, for the reasons  already
given, validly constituted and had no legal existence, and,95secondly,  that the new provision introduced by	 thePunjab
Act9 of 1957 has no retrospective operation and  that,  in
consequence,  the proceedings which had been pending  before
the old Tribunal on March 10, 1957, could not be transferred
to the new Tribunal under this section.The  present reference 30 of 1957 was pending till  June  3,
1959, when Sbri A.N. Gujral retired.  The Punjab  Government
then issued a Notification appointing Sri Kesho Ram  Passey,
retired	 Judge	of the Punjab High Court  as  the  Presiding
Officer of the Industrial Tribunal, Jullundur.	Before	him,
the  present appellant filed an application on September  4,
1959,  raising	a number of preliminary	 objections  to	 the
hearing of the reference.  By its Order dated September	 11,
1959,  the  Tribunal overruled these objections	 and  posted
the.   matter  for  hearing  on	 the  merits.	It  is	 the
correctness  of this Order that is DOW challenged before  us
in this Appeal.Though a number of objections were raised to the bearing  of
the  rieference	 be,.fore  the	Tribunal,  the	 contentions
advanced before us for the appellant are the following :-
(1)  Shri A. N. Gujral was riot qualified to be appointedto
the Tribunal unders. 7(3)(c)of the Act that, in consequence,
the   reference	 to  him  dated	  February  14,	 1955,	 was
incompetent;(2)that	 the Notification. of the Punjab Government  dated
April  19, 1957 appointing Shri A. N. Gujral as a Member  of
the  Industrial	 Tribunal,  Juilundur,	and  the  subsequent
Notifications	extending   bis	 tenures   of	office	 are
unauthorised and inoperative;(3)that	 the Notification of the Punjab	 Government  dated
Ootober	 31,  1957, transferring  the  proccedings.  pending
before the old Tribunal to the new Tribunal was inoperative,
because (i) thePunjab Act8 of 1957 is void being repugnant
toArt. 14of the, Constitution and the appointment of	Shri
A.   N. Gujral as Member under that Act is also void;96and  (ii)s. 30(2)enacted byPunjab Act9  of	 1957  under
which  the transfer was made, did not authorise transfer  of
proceedings,  which had been pending on or before March	 10,
1957.(1)  Taking up first the, contention that Shri A. N.  Gujral
was not qualified to be appointed to the Tribunal on  August
29, 1953, by reason of the fact that he was over sixty years
of  age,  the  question	 is one	 of  interpretation  of	 the
language ofs. 7(3)(c)of the Act.Section 7, in so far  As
it is material for the present purpose, is as follows:-"7. Industrial Tribunals.-(1) The	 appropriate
	      Government   may	constitute,  one  or more
			    Industrial	Tribunals for the, adjudication	 o
f
	      industrial  disputes  in accordance  with	 the
	      provisions of this Act.(2)A Tribunal shall consist of such  number
	      of  independent  members	as  the	 appropriate
	      Government  may  think fit  to  appoint,,	 and
	      where  the Tribunal  consists of two or  more
	      members, one of them shall be appointed as the
	      Chairman thereof.(3)Where	a  Tribunal consists of	 one  member
	      only,  that member, and where it	consists  of
	      two  or  more  members, the  Chairman  of	 the
	      Tribunal, shall be a person who-(a)is or has been a Judge of a High Court; or(b)   is or has been a District Judge or(c)  is qualified for appointment as a  Judge
	      of a High Court:Provided	 that  no  appointment	under	this
	      subsection to a Tribunal shall be made of	 any
	      person Dot qualified under clause (a) or	(b)
	      except with the approval of the High Court of97the  State  in which the Tribunal has,  or  is
	      intended to have its usual seat."Shri  A. N. Gujral was appointed unders. 7(3)(c)being  an
Advocate.   The question is, whether he was  then  qualified
for  appointment  as  a Judge of a  High  Court	 under	that
clause.	 The Constitutional provision hearing on this  point
isArt. 217, which in so far as it is material is as follows
:-"217. (1) Every Judge of a High Court shall be
	      appointed	 by the President by  warrant  under
	      his hand and seal after consultation with	 the
	      Chief  Justice of India, the Governor  of	 the
	      State,  and, in the case of appointment  of  a
	      Judge other than the Chief Justice, the  Chief
	      Justice  of  the High Court,  and	 shall	hold
	      office in the case of an additional or  acting
	      Judge, as provided inarticle 224, and in	 any
	      other  case until he attains the age of  sixty
	      years;Provided that...............
	      (2)A  person  shall not  be  qualified  for
	      appointment as a Judge of a High Court  unless
	      he is citizen of India and-(a)   has for at least ten years held an
	       Judicialoffice  in the territory of  India,
	      or(b)  has	 for  at  least	 ten  years  been  a
	      advocate	of  a High Court or of two  or	more
	      such Courts in succession.Explanation........WhileArt.  217  (2)prescribes  the	qualifications	 for
appointment as a Judge,Art. 217(1)lays down that the Judge
shall  hold office until he attains the age of sixty  years.
The  whole of the controversy before us is as to the  inter-
relation  between these two clauses.  The contention of	 Mr.
Pathak,	 learned counsel for the appellant, is	that  thoughArt.  217 (1)refers, in terms, to the termination  of the
office of Judge, in substance, it lays down a98qualification for appointment, because the appointment of  a
person	over sixty as a Judge would clearly be repugnant  toArt.   217(1)even  though  he  might	 satisfy   all	 the
requirements ofArt. 217(2).It is accordingly argued	that
it  is an implied qualification for appointment as  a  Judge
underArt. 217that the person should not have attained	 the
age of sixty at the time of the appointment.
We agree that there is implicit inArt. 217(1)a prohibition
against appointment as a Judge of a person who has  attained
the  age  of sixty years.  But in our view, that is  in	 the
nature	of  a  condition governing the	appointment  to	 the
office-not a qualification with reference to a person who is
to be appointed thereto.  There is manifest on the terms and
on  the	 scheme of the article a clear	distinction  between
requirements  as  to  the  age of  a  person  who  could  be
appointed as a Judge and his fitness based on experience and
ability	 to  fill the office.Art. 217(1)deals  with	 the
former, and, in form, it has reference to the termination of
the  office  and  can therefore be  properly  read  only  as
imposing,  by  implication  a  restriction  on	making	 the
appointment.   In  strong contrast to this  isArt.  217(2)which  expressly refers to the qualifications of the  person
to  be appointed such as his having held a judicial post  or
having	been an Advocate for a period of not less  than	 ten
years.	We think that on a true construction of the  article
the  prescription as to age is a condition attached  to	 the
duration   of  the  office  and	 not  a	 qualification	 for
appointment to it.Mr.  Pathak  also  relied on Arts. 224 and  376	 as  lending
support	 to his contention that age is to be regarded as  an
implied	 qualification underArt. 217.Art. 224relates  to
the  appointment of additional and acting Judges and  it  is
provided in els. (1) and (2) that the person to be appointed
as  additional or acting Judge by the President should be  a
duly  qualified person.	 There is nothing about the  age  of
the person to be appointed in these clauses.99That  is provided inArt. 224(3)when enacts that no  person
appointed  as an additional or acting Judge of a High  Court
shall  hold office after attaining the age of sixty  years."
This  article is also framed on the same lines asArt.	 217and  does  not	carry  the matter  further.   Nor  is  there
anything inArt. 376which throws any further light on	this
point.	 It has reference to persons who were Judges in	 the
High  Courts  of the States specified in part of  the  First
Schedule at the time when the Constitution came into  force,
and  provides  that  they shall become Judges  of  the	High
Courts	in  those States under the  Constitution,  and	then
enacts a special provision that they "shall  notwithstanding
anything in clauses (1) and (2) ofarticle 217but  subject
to  the proviso to clause (1) of, that article, continue  to
hold  office  until  the expiration of such  period  as	 the
President  may	by order determine." We see nothing  in	 the
terms  of  this	 article  which lends  any  support  to	 the
contention that age is to be regarded as a qualification.
More  to the point under consideration isArt. 165 (1)that
the  ",Governor of each State shall appoint a person who  is
qualified to be appointed as a Judge of a High Court to	 be
Advocate-General  for  the  State." The	 question  has	been
discussed whether on the terms of this article" a person who
has  attained  the  age of sixty could be  appointed  as  an
Advocate-General.  If the age of a person is to be  regarded
as one of his qualifications, then he	could  not be.	 The
point arose for decision in G.	   D.	Karkare	 v.  T.	  L.
Shevde	(1),  where a Judge who had retired at the  age of
sixty had been appointed as Advocate-General.  The  validity
of the appointment was challenged on the ground that he was
disqualified  by reason of his age.  The learned  Judges  of
the  Nagpur High Court held that cl. (1) ofArt. 217of	 the
Constitution prescribed only the duration of the appointment
of a Judge of the High Court and could not be construed
(1)  I. L.R. [1952] Nas. 409.100as  prescribing a qualification for his appointment.  It  is
argued	for  the  appellant  that  the	appointment  of	  an
Advocate-General  underArt. 165might stand on a  different
footing from that of a Judge underArt. 217.because of	 the
special provision inArt.  165(3)that  the   Advocate-
General	 is  to hold office, at pleasure,  whereas  a  Judge
holds  office  during good behavior.   But  this  difference
bears  only  on the power of the  appropriate  authority  to
terminate  the appointment and not on the  qualification  of
the person to be appointed to the office.  In our view,	 the
interpretation put uponArt. 217in G.	D.  Karkare's	case
(1) is correct.Though	the true meaning ofArt. 217has figured largely  in
the  argument  before  us, it is to be	noted  that  we	 are
primarily  concerned in this appeal with the  interpretation
ofs. 7(3)(c)of the Act, and that must ultimately turn  on
its own context.Section 7(3)(a)provides for the  appoint-
ment of a High Court Judge, sitting or retired, as a  Member
of  the Tribunal.  Age is clearly not a qualification  under
this  sub-clause, as the age for retirement for a  Judge  of
the High Court is sixty.  Likewise, el. (b) provides for the
appointment  of a District Judge, setting or retired,  as  a
Member.	  A  retired District Judge who is aged	 over  sixty
will be eligible for appointment under this subclause.	Thus
the  age of a person does not enter into his  qualifications
under	sub-cls.  (a)  and  (b).   It  would  therefore	  be
legitimate  to	construe sub-el. (c) as	 not  importing	 any
qualification  on  the ground of age.  But it is  said	that
sub-cls. (a) and (b) form a distinct group having  reference
to  judicial  officers,	 whereas, cl.  (c)  is	confined  to
Advocates,  who form a distinct category by themselves,	 and
that  in view of this difference, considerations as  to	 age
applicable to cl. (a) and (b) need not be applicable to	 el.(c).  There is undoubtedly a distinction
(1)  I. L. R.[1952] Nag. 409.101between cls. (a) and (b) on the one hand and c1. (c) on	 the
other.	But the	 question is whether this has any reasonable
relation  to  the  difference which is	sought	to  be	made
between	 the  two  classes  with reference  to	the  age  of
appointment.   If  a retired Judge of the age of  sixty	 can
fittingly fill the office of a Member of the Tribunal  under
s.  7, an Advocate of that age can likewise do so.   In	 our
view,  there  is no ground for importing ins.	 7(3)(c)an
implied qualification as to age, which is not applicable  to
el. 7(3)(a) and (b).This  question was considered by a Bench of the Punjab	High
Court  inPrabhudayal v. State of Punjab(1).	  There	 the
validity  of the appointment of Shri A. N. Gujral under	 the
notification dated August 29, 1953, which is the very  point
now  under debate, was challenged on the ground that  as  he
was  over  sixty on that date, he was not  qualified  to  be
appointed  unders. 1(3)(c).  The Court held  approving  of
the  decision  in  G.  D.  Karkare's  case  (2),  that	 the
prescription   as  to  age  inArt.  217  (1)was  not   a
qualification  to the office of a Judge underArt.  217(2),
and that a person who was more than sixty was qualified	 for
appointment unders. 7(3)(c).Reliance  is placed for the appellant on the terms ofs.  7Cwhich was substituted by theAmendment Act36 of 1956 in the
place  ofs. 7as supporting the contention that age  is  a
qualification for appointment unders. 7(3)(c).Section 7Cis as follows :-"No person shall be appointed to, or  continue
	      in,  the office of the presiding officer of  a
	      Labour  Court, Tribunal or National  Tribunal,
	      if-(a)   he is not an independent pet-son or
	       (1) A. 1. R (1959) Pun. 460.(2) 1.1 R.[1952] Nag. 409.102(b)   he	has attained the age  of  sixty-five
	      years' "The  marginal note to that section which was also relied  on
is as follows :-"	   Disqualifications   for   the   presiding
	      officers	of  Labour  Courts,  Tribunals	 and
	      National Tribunals."The  argument of the appellant is that, in  prescribing	 the
age  as	 a qualification unders. 7C, the  Legislature	only
made  explicit	what was implicit in a.	 7(3)(c),  and	that
therefore the qualification on the basis of age should	also
be imported ins. 7(3)(c).  This inference does not, in	 our
opinion,  follow.  The insertion of age qualification ins.
7Cis more consistent with an intention on the part of	 the
Legislature  to	 add,  in the light of the  working  of	 the
repealeds.  7,  a new provision  prescribing	the  age  of
retirement  for Members.  We agree with the decision of	 the
Punjab High Court in Prabhudayals case (1) and hold thats.
7(3) (c) does not import any qualification based on the age
of  the person to be appointed, and that the appointment  of
Shri A.	  N.  Gujral on August 29, 1953, was valid under  a.
7(3)(c).(2)The next contention advanced for the appellant is  that
the Notification dated April 19, 1957, appointing Shri A. N.
Gujral as a Member of the Tribunal issued unders. 30of the
Amendment Act 36 of 1956 was not authorised by the terms  of
that  section  and  that  therefore  there  was	 no  validly
constituted Tribunal from that date.Section 30is as follows :-"Savings	as  to	proceedings  pending  before
	      Tribunals	  :   If  immediately	before	 the
	      commencement of this Act there is pending	 any
	      proceeding   in  relation	 to  an	  Industrial
	      dispute before a Tribunal constituted
	      (1)   A. I. R. [1959] Punj 460.103under theIndustrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of
	      1947),  as in force before such  commencement,
	      the   dispute  may  be  adjudicated  and	 the
	      proceeding disposed of by that Tribunal  after
	      such commencement, as if this Act had not been
	      passed."The  contention	 urged before us is thats. 7under  ,Which
Shri A. N. Gujral had been constituted Tribunal was repealed
on  March 10, 1957, the notification dated April  19,  1957,
appointing  him as a Member of the Tribunal is void.   There
is  no substance in this contention.Section  30expressly
provides for the life of the Tribunal being extended for the
period	specified  therein, and that necessarily  implies  a
power to continue Shri A. N. Gujral as the Tribunal, and  we
should add that in view of our decision on point No. 3	this
objection is practically of no importance.
(3)Lastly,  it	is  contended that  the	 transfer  of  the
proceedings  pending  before  the old Tribunal	to  the	 new
Tribunal under the Notification dated October 31, 1957,	 was
invalid and inoperative.  Two grounds were urged in  support
of  this contention.  One is that Shri A.N. Gujral  attained
the  age  of  sixty-five on June 4, 1957, and  his  term  of
office	would have then expired under s.7C. Then the  Punjab
Legislature  enacted  Act  8  of 1957  raising	the  age  of
retirement  under  s.70(b) from sixty-five  to	sixty-seven.
That  was  with	 a, view to continue  Shri  A.N.  Gujral  in
office.	  And this legislation came into force only on	June
3, 1957.This Act, it is said offendsArt. 14as its object
was  to benefit a particular individual, Shri  A.N.  Gujral,
and  reference	was  made to a decision	 of  this  Court  in
Ameeroonissa  v. Mehboob (1) as supporting this	 contention.
There is no force in this contention.  There the legislation
related to the estate of one
(1)  [1953] S.C.R. 404.104Nawab  Waliuddoula,  and  it provided  that  the  claims  of
Mahboob Begum and Kadiran Begum, who claimed as heirs  stood
dismissed thereby and could not be called in question in any
court of law.  And this Court held that it was repugnant  toArt.  14, as it singled out individuals and denied them	 the
right which other citizens have of resort to a court of law.
But  the impugned Act, 8 of 1957 is of general	application,
the  age being raised to sixty-seven with reference  to	 all
persons holding the office under that section.	The occasion
which  inspired	 the enactment of the statute might  be	 the
impending retirement of Shri A. N. Gujral.  But that is	 not
a   ground  for	 holding  that	it  is	discriminatory	 and
contravenesArt. 14, when it is, on its terms,	 of  general
application.The second ground of attack against the order of transfer is
that it is not competent under s.30(2) of theAmendment	 Act36  of 1956 as further amended by thePunjab Act9 of  1957.Section 30(2)is as follows :"If  immediately	before the  commencement  of
	      this  Act there was pending any proceeding  in
	      relation	to  an industrial dispute  before  a
	      Tribunal	constituted  under  theIndustrial
	      Disputes	Act, 1947, as in force	before	such
	      commencement and such proceeding could riot be
	      disposed	of  by	that  Tribunal	due  to	 the
	      Tribunal	having come to an end on the  expiry
	      of  the period for which it  was	constituted,
	      the  State  Government may  reconstitute	that
	      Tribunal	for  adjudicating that	dispute	 and
	      disposing	  of  that  proceeding	after	such
			    commencement  as  if  this	Act  had  not  bee
n
	      passed, and the proceeding may be continued by
	      that Tribunal from the, stage at which it	 was
	      left."105The contention urged before us is that this provision has no
retrospective	operation  and	that  in   consequence	 the
proceedings  which had been pending before the old  Tribunal
on  March  10,	1957, could not be transferred	to  the	 new
Tribunal  under	 this section.	This contention	 is  clearly
untenable, because the whole object of s.30(2) is to provide
for  the hearing of disputes which were pending	 before	 the
old  Tribunal, and its operation is entirely  retrospective.
This contention must there. fore be rejected.
In the result, the repeal fails and is dismissed with costs.
Appeal dismissed.