Take notes as you read a judgment using ourVirtual Legal Assistantand get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out ourPremium Memberservices --Free for one month.Supreme Court of IndiaThe State Of West Bengal And Others vs Naba Kumar Seal on 29 August, 1960Equivalent citations: 1961 AIR   16, 1961 SCR  (1) 368Author: B P SinhaBench: Sinha, Bhuvneshwar P.(Cj), Kapur, J.L., Gajendragadkar, P.B., Subbarao, K., Wanchoo, K.N.PETITIONER:
THE STATE OF WEST BENGAL AND OTHERS

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
NABA KUMAR SEAL.

DATE OF JUDGMENT:
29/08/1960

BENCH:
SINHA, BHUVNESHWAR P.(CJ)
BENCH:
SINHA, BHUVNESHWAR P.(CJ)
KAPUR, J.L.
GAJENDRAGADKAR, P.B.
SUBBARAO, K.
WANCHOO, K.N.

CITATION:
 1961 AIR   16		  1961 SCR  (1) 368


ACT:
Acquisition  of	 land-Settlement  of  immigrants-Development
scheme-If necessary in cases of acquisition under emergency-
Absence	 of  development  scheme-If  infringes	 fundamental
rights-West Bengal Development and Planning Act, 1948 (21 of
1948),s. 7-Constitutionof  India,  Arts.  14,   19(1)(f),
31(2).



HEADNOTE:
By  a notification under s. 4 of the West Bengal Land  Deve-
lopment and Planning Act, 1948, the Government declared that
certain	 plots	of  land belonging to  the  respondent	were
needed	for the settlement of immigrants from East  Pakistan
and  for  improving  living  conditions	 in  the   locality.
Thereafter   a	second	notification  was  issued   by	 the
Government  unders. 6read withS. 7of the  Act  declaring
that  the  plots covered by the previous  notification	were
needed	for  the same purpose as stated therein.   When	 the
Government  started  to erect structures on  the  land	thus
acquired the respondent moved the High Court underArt.	 226of  the	 Constitution challenging the vires of the  Act	 and
impugning  the legality of the proceedings taken under	tile
Act.   The petition was heard by a judge of the	 High  Court
sitting	 singly	 who negatived all the	contentions  of	 the
petitioner  and	 discharged  the rule.	 On  appeal  by	 the
respondent under the Letters Patent, a Division Bench of the
High Court held that the Act did not infringe the provisions
of  Arts. 19(i)(f) and 31(2) of the Constitution.  The	High
Court  further	held  that it was  incumbent  on  the  State
Government to frame a development scheme after possession of
the  land  had	been taken even though	the  Government	 was
entitled  to deal with the land on an emergency basis  under
s. 7 of the Act, which runs thus:-
"  In cases of urgency, if in respect of any  notified	area
the State Government is satisfied that the preparation of  a
development  scheme  is	 likely to  be	delayed,  the  State
Government may, at any time, make a declaration unders.  6,
in respect of such notified area or any part thereof  though
no development scheme has either been prepared or sanctioned
unders. 5".
The High Court allowed the respondent's appeal and  directed
a writ of mandamus to issue to the Government requiring them
to  proceed  to frame a development scheme in terms  of	 the
Act.  On appeal by the State of West Bengal on a certificate
granted by the High Court,
369
Held,  that  the  High Court was in  error  in	issuing	 the
mandamus against the appellants.Section 7of the Act	com-
pletely dispensed with the statutory necessity of  preparing
a  scheme of development as envisaged ins. 5of the Act  in
cases  where the Government had taken the decision  that  it
was  necessary	to  proceed  further  with  the	 acquisition
proceedings without waiting for a development scheme.
No discrimination was implicit in the provisions ofs. 7of
the  Act  and  no fundamental right  of	 the  appellant	 was
infringed  either underArt. 14or Arts. 19(1)(f) and  31(2)
of the Constitution.



JUDGMENT:CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 212/55.
Appeal	from the Judgment and Decree dated July 7, 1953,  of
the  Calcutta High Court in Appeal from Original  Order	 No.
157  of 1952, arising out of the Judgment and  Decree  dated
March  28,  1952, of the said High Court in Civil  Rule	 No.
1409 of 1951.B.   Sen and P. K. Bose for the appellants.P.   K. Ghosh for the respondent.S.   C.	  Mazumdar   for  the  Intervener   (Gopalpur	Land
Development Society, Ltd.).1960.	August 29.  The Judgment of the Court was  delivered
by
SINHA  C. J.-The only substantial question that	 arises	 for
determination  in this appeal, on a certificate	 granted  by
the  Calcutta  High  Court  underArt.	133  (1)(c)of	 the
Constitution,  is whether the Government of West Bengal	 was
bound to frame a development scheme under the provisions  of
the  West  Bengal Land Development and Planning Act,  21  of
1948, which hereinafter will be referred to as the Act, when
it exercised its power of emergency unders. 7of the Act.
The facts of this case lie within a very narrow compass	 and
are  as	 follows: The respondent was the owner of  about  18
bighas	of land in a certain village in the district  of  24
Parganas.   By	a notification dated January  6,  1950,	 and
published  in the Calcutta Gazette dated January  12,  1950,
unders.  4of the Act, the Government	 declared  that	 the
cadastral survey370plots,	particulars whereof were given in the  notification,
were  likely to be needed for the settlement  of  immigrants
and  for  creation  of	better	living	conditions  in	 the
locality.  Thereafter a notification was' issued unders.  6read  withs. 7of the Act and published  in  the  Calcutta
Gazette	 dated	April  27, 1950, declaring  that  the  plots
covered by the notification unders. 4aforesaid were needed
for  the  very same purposes as stated in  the	notification
unders.  4. On or about December 16, 1950,  possession  of
those  plots,  except three, was taken	by  the	 Government.
When  the Government started to erect certain structures  on
the  land thus acquired and stored building  materials	near
about, the respondent moved the High Court underArt. 226of
the  Constitution  challenging	the vires  of  the  Act	 and
impugning  the legality of the proceedings taken  under	 the
Act.   The  matter  was heard by H.  K.	 Bose,	J.,  sitting
singly.	  Before  him the grounds urged in  support  of	 the
petition  were that the release of the three plots from	 the
acquisition proceedings rendered the entire proceedings	 bad
in law; that there was no urgency for the Government to take
steps  unders. 7of the Act, and for issuing	the  notifi-
cation	unders.  6; and that the provisions	of  the	 Act
infringed   the	 fundamental  rights  of   the	 respondent,
petitioner in the High Court, enshrined inArt. 19(1)(f)of
the Constitution.  The learned Judge, by his judgment  dated
March	28,  1952,  negatived  all  those  contentions	 and
discharged  the	 rule  issued  by  the	High  Court  on	 the
Government  of West Bengal and others underArt. 226of	 the
Constitution.The respondent preferred an appeal under the Letters Patent.
The appeal was heard by a Division Bench consisting of G. N.
Das  and Debabrata Mookerjee, JJ.  By their  judgment  dated
July 7, 1953, it was held that the Act did not infringe	 the
provisions  ofArt.  31 (2)of the  Constitution  and	that
therefore it became unnecessary to express any opinion	with
respect	 to the provisions ofArt. 19(1)(f).But the  Bench
also examined the provisions of the Act in the light ofArt.
19(1)(f)of the Constitution and came to the conclusion that
there was no infirmity in the Act,371even on that score, Having decided all the points raised  on
behalf	of the appellant before it, the High  Court  allowed
the  appellant to raise another controversy, which  had	 not
been raised before the learned single Judge, namely, whether
it  was incumbent on the Government to frame  a	 development
scheme, after A possession had been taken by it, of the land
in question.  Ordinarily, such a controversy should not have
been allowed to be raised for the first time in the court of
appeal.	  Be that as it may, it came to the conclusion	that
even  though  the Government was entitled to deal  with	 the
land  on  an emergency basis unders. 7of the Act,  it	 was
incumbent  on  the State Government to frame  a	 development
scheme after possession had been taken.	 The main reason for
this conclusion as given by the High Court is that thoughs.
7had armed the Government with the power to take possession
of the property before framing a scheme of development,	 the
section	 does not, in terms, dispense with the necessity  of
framing	 a development scheme, after the emergency had	been
declared and possession taken.	In that view of the  matter,
the court of appeal allowed the appeal in part and  directed
a  writ of mandamus to issue to the respondents	 before	 it,
requiring  them to proceed to frame a development scheme  in
terms  of  the	Act.  The State of  West  Bengal  and  other
officials who had been impleaded as respondents in the	High
Court  applied	for leave to appeal to this Court  from	 the
said  judgment of the appeal court.  The High Court  granted
the leave prayed for, on condition that the appellants	paid
for  the representation of the respondent before this  Court
by a junior Advocate of this Court.  That is how the  matter
comes before this Court.It  was argued on behalf of the appellants that	 the  appeal
court had misapprehended the scope and effect ofss. 4,5,6and7of the Act; that the Act contemplated two  categories
of acquisition proceedings, namely, (1) acquisition unders.
6,  after  compliance with the provisions ofs.	 5and	 (2)
acquisition in case of an emergency unders. 7read withs.
6of the Act; that the condition precedent laid down ins. 5necessitating48372the  framing of a scheme before a declaration unders. 6of
the  Act  was  made, is specifically excluded  in  cases  of
emergency  once	 a declaration of emergency unders.  7is
made.  The High Court was, therefore, in error in  insisting
upon  the framing of a development scheme unders. 5of	 the
Act,  when that section had not been made applicable to	 the
case  of  an emergency acquisition.  Once the  property	 has
been acquired it vests in the Government and thereafter	 the
original  holder of the property has no say in	the  matter,
except on the question of amount of compensation.  Mr.	Sen,
for the appellants, finally contended that if the High Court
was  right in insisting upon a scheme of  development  being
framed, the whole purpose of declaring an emergency would be
defeated.The  learned  counsel for the respondent has  not  made	 any
serious attempt to meet the contentions raised on behalf  of
the   appellants,  but	has  attempted	to  show  that	 the
provisions of the Act, in so far as they give special powers
to  Government to declare an emergency and then	 to  proceed
with  the  acquisition without the necessity  of  framing  a
scheme	of development, were unconstitutional, both in	view
of the provisions ofArt. 31(2)andArt. 19(1)(f).He	also
made  a very feeble attempt to rely upon the  provisions  ofArt.  14of  the  Constitution	 and  to  suggest  that	 the
respondent   was   being  discriminated	  against   in	 the
application  of the emergency provisions of the Act  to	 his
case.In  our	 opinion, the contentions raised on  behalf  of	 the
appellants  are manifestly well-founded and the	 High  Court
was  clearly  in error in issuing the mandamus	against	 the
appellants.Before dealing with the contentions raised on behalf of	 the
parties,  it  is convenient, at this stage, to set  out	 the
relevant  provisions of the Act.The Actreplaced the	West
Bengal Land Development and Planning Ordinance, 11 of  1948,
which  was  in similar terms.The Actand  the  Ordinance,
which  it replaced, were enacted apparently as a  result  of
the emergency created by the continual exodus of Hindus from
East Pakistan on a mass scale and the consequent immigration
of a very large population into West Bengal' as a result  of
the373partition.The  Actwas  enacted "  to  provide  for	 the
acquisition  and development of land for public purposes  ".
It  adopts the definitions of " land ", " Collector " and  "
company	 "  as in theLand Acquisition Act, 1  of  1894,  to
which it is, in its terms, supplementary.  In the definitionsection	 2, " development scheme " means, a scheme  for	 the
development of land for any public purpose; and a " notified
area  " has been defined as an area declared as	 such  under
sub-s.	(1) ofs. 4. " Public purpose " has been defined  in
cl.  (d)  ofs.  2as	 including  (i)	 the  settlement  of
immigrants  who have migrated into the State of West  Bengal
on  account of circumstances beyond their control, (ii)	 the
establishment  of  towns, model	 villages  and	agricultural
colonies, (iii) the creation of better living conditions  in
urban  and  rural  areas,  and	(iv)  the  improvement	 and
development   of   agriculture,	 forestry,   fisheries	 and
industries  ; but does not include a purpose of	 the  Union.Section	 3authorises the State Government to appoint the  "
prescribed authority " for carrying out the purposes of	 the
Act.Section 4is, in terms, analogous tos. 4of the	Land
Acquisition  Act  and  authorises the  State  Government  by
notification in the Official Gazette to declare any area  to
be  a notified area on being satisfied that  that  specified
area  is  needed or is likely to be needed  for	 any  public
purpose.The	Actwas amended in 1955 by theWest  Bengal
Act,  XXIII of 1955, and one of the amendments made by	that
Act  was to adds. 4Amaking provision for objections to  be
taken  by  any	person interested in  any  land	 within	 the
notified area, for an opportunity of being heard and for  an
enquiry	 being	made on the merits of such  objections,	 and
finally	 for submission to the State Government of a  report
on the objections raised.  We are not concerned in this case
withs. 4A, because it was inserted into the Act after	 the
decision  of  the case by the High Court.Section  5,	with
which  we  are	mainly concerned in this case  is  in  these
terms:-"5(1).	 The  State  Government may  direct  the  prescribed
authority,  or, if it so thinks fit in any  case,  authorise
any  Company' or local authority, to prepare, in  accordance
with the rules, a development scheme374in  respect of any notified area and thereupon	such  scheme
shall  be prepared accordingly and submitted, together	with
such  particulars as may be prescribed by the rules, to	 the
State Government for its sanction :Provided  that no scheme shall be necessary for	 acquisition
of  land for the public purpose specified in sub-clause	 (i)
of clause (d) ofsection 2.(2).	  A  development  scheme  submitted  to	 the   State
Government  under  subsection  (1) may,	 after	taking	into
consideration any report submitted under sub. section (2) ofsection	  4A,  be  sanctioned  by  it  either  without	 any
modification or subject to such modifications as it may deem
fit."The proviso to a. 5 was added by the same amending Act (West
Bengal	Act XXIII of 1955) and is likewise  inapplicable  to
this case.Section 6again is, in terms, analogous tos.  6of  the	 Land  Acquisition  Act,  which	 provides  for	 the
declaration  to be published in the Official Gazette to	 the
effect that the State Government was satisfied that any land
in a notified area, for which a development scheme has	been
sanctioned  unders.  5(2)of the Act, is  needed  for	 the
purpose of executing such a scheme, unless there already has
been  a declaration made unders. 7of the Act.Section  7,
which  is  another  section, the construction  of  which  is
involved in this case, is in these terms:-"  In cases of urgency, if in respect of any  notified	area
the State Government is satisfied that the preparation of  a
development  scheme  is	 likely to  be	delayed,  the  State
Government  may,  at  any time,	 make  a  declaration  undersection	 6,  in respect of such notified area  or  any	part
thereof	 though	 no  development  scheme  has  either	been
prepared or sanctioned undersection 5."Section	 8makes the provisions of theLand Acquisition	 Actapplicable to acquisition proceedings taken in pursuance  of
the declaration made, either unders. 6ors. 7of the	Act,
subject	 to  certain reservations made in pursuance  of	 the
provisos   to	s.  8,	relating   to	taking	 possession,
determination  of the amount of compensation, and of  market
value.	 The other sections of the Act are not	relevant  to
the  point in controversy in this case and, therefore,	need
not be adverted to.375It  will be noticed thats. 7is in the nature of a  proviso
tos. 6.Section 7provides that in cases of urgency, if the
State  Government  is satisfied that the  preparation  of  a
development  scheme is likely to be delayed, it may  make  a
declaration  tinders.	 6that the land was  needed  for  a
public purpose, even though no development scheme has either
been  prepared	or  sanctioned	unders.  5.  The  section,
therefore,  in clear terms, authorises the State  Government
to  issue the necessary declaration unders. 6,	 which	puts
the  machinery of land acquisition proceedings into  motion,
if it is satisfied that the public purpose necessitating the
acquisition  of	 the  land in question	would  be  subserved
without	 the preparation of a development scheme.The	 Actitself	came  into  existence  in  circumstances  of   great
urgency.  Naturally, therefore, in suitable cases, where the
preparation  of a development scheme would cause delay,	 the
Government was authorised to proceed with the acquisition of
land  after making the necessary declaration unders. 6.  As
already	 indicated after that declaration has been  made  by
Government in the Official Gazette and the necessary enquiry
made  about  compensation and the making of the	 award,	 the
property  becomes vested in tile Government.   The  question
naturally arises whether there is anything in the Act  which
makes  it  obligatory on the State Government to  prepare  a
scheme	of  development	 thereafter.   The  High  Court	 has
recognised  the	 need for taking speedy action to  meet	 the
emergency  created by the heavy influx of  immigrants.	 The
High  Court  has  observed thats. 7does  not,  in  terms,
dispense  with the framing of a development scheme and	that
it  merely says that the Government may issue a	 declaration
unders.  6,  even though no development  scheme  has	been
framed.	  But the High Court has further observed that	even
after  taking possession of the property under r. 8,  framed
under the Act, within three days, there is no reason why the
normal	process	 envisaged  in the Act should  not  be	gone
through.  The argument proceeds further that the Act  itself
contemplated land planning and development and therefore the
framing of a development scheme was an essential part of the376process.   Hence, in the view of the High Court the  framing
of  a development scheme was necessary in the normal  course
before the declaration unders. 6is made by the Government,
and  in	 the  case  of urgency	unders.  7,  after  taking
possession of the land in question.  In our opinion, such  a
construction  of the provisions of the Act is not  warranted
by the terms of the Act.  The addition of the proviso tos.
5,  quoted  above, makes it clear that the  Legislature	 has
recognised  the	 necessity in special circumstances  of	 not
framing	 a  scheme  in	the  case  of  the  public   purpose
contemplated in cl. (d)(i) ofs. 2, namely, for the  purpose
of  settlement	of  immigrants.	 On a fair  reading  of	 the
relevant  provisions of the Statute, it becomes	 clear	that
the  Act contemplated acquisitions of two distinct  classes,
namely,	 (1) where the Government bad first  considered	 and
sanctioned a development scheme under the provisions ofs. 5and then made a declaration that the land in a notified area
was  needed  for  the purpose of  executing  the  particular
development scheme and (2) where the notification unders. 6is  made without any development scheme being  prepared	 and
sanctioned unders. 5. Once the declaration is made unders.
6,  the	 machinery of theLand Acquisition Act, 1  of  1894,
comes into operation, of course subject to the	reservations
contained  in the provios tos. 8, as aforesaid.The	Land
Acquisition Actitself does not contemplate the	 preparation
of  any	 such scheme of development.  In other words,s.  7completely  dispenses with the statutory necessity  of	pre-
paring	a scheme of development as envisaged ins. 5of	 the
Act  in	 cases where the Government has taken  the  decision
that it is necessary to proceed further with the acquisition
proceedings without waiting for the preparation of a scheme.
To insist upon the preparation of a development scheme would
amount to rendering the provisions ofs. 7otiose.  There is
no justification for the observation made by the High  Court
that   the  Legislature	 did  not  intend  that	 the   State
Government   should  proceed  with  the	  land	 acquisition
proceedings  under  the	 Act without  framing  a  scheme  of
development.377The High Court has recognised the legal position that it  is
open to the Government to take possession of the land  under
acquisition  within  three  days after	the  making  of	 the
declaration  of urgency unders. 7, but has  insisted  that,
even  after taking possession as a measure of  urgency,	 the
Government  was bound to,, prepare a scheme of	development.
If that were so, the question naturally arises: to what	 use
the  land so taken possession of was to be put.	 The  taking
of possession in cases of urgency would itself predicate the
use of the land thus taken possession of by the	 Government.
But  if the Government were to wait for the preparation	 and
sanction  of the scheme before putting the land acquired  to
any  use, the very purpose of declaring the urgency and	 the
taking	of  possession	would be  defeated.   It  is  clear,
therefore, that the Legislature did not mean to insist	upon
the preparation of a scheme of development in cases of	land
acquisition brought within the purview ofs. 7of the Act.
That  disposes of the appeal.  But the learned	counsel	 for
the  respondent	 appealed  to the provisions  of  Arts.	 14,
19(1)(f)  and  31(2)  of  the Constitution  in	aid  of	 his
contention   thats.  7of  the  Act	was   ultra   vires.
Apparently,   there  is	 no  discrimination.	As   already
indicated,  there  are two classes of cases into  which	 the
land acquisition proceedings envisaged by the Act fall.	 The
two classes can be easily identified and the purpose of	 the
classification is based on a rational consideration,  having
due  regard  to the purpose and policy underlying  the	Act,
namely, to acquire land for the public purpose, inter  alia,
of  resettling immigrants who had to leave their hearth	 and
home on account of circumstances beyond their control.	Such
cases  of urgency, as come unders. 7, are clearly meant  to
serve  the  main  purpose  of  the  Act.   In  our  opinion,
therefore,  there  is no substance in  the  contention	that
discrimination is implicit in the provisions ofs. 7.
The  attack on the Act based on Arts. 19(1)(f) and 31(2)  of
the Constitution is futile in view of the provisions ofArt.
31B, which is in these terms:-378"  Without  prejudice to the generality	 of  the  provisions
contained  inarticle 31A, none of the Acts and	 Regulations
specified  in the Ninth Schedule nor any of  the  provisions
thereof	 shall be deemed to be void, or ever to have  become
void,  on the ground that such Act, Regulation or  provision
is  inconsistent with, or takes away or abridges any of	 the
rights	conferred  by,	any provisions	of  this  Part,	 and
notwithstanding	 any judgment, decree or order of any  court
or  tribunal  to  the contrary, each of the  said  Acts	 and
Regulations  shall,  subject to the power of  any  competent
Legislature to repeal or amended it, continue in force."The Actin question is the last entry (serial number 20)  in
the  Ninth  Schedule.Article	 31B,  quoted  above,  which
renders	 the  Act  immune  from all  attacks  based  on	 the
provisions  of	Part  III of the  Constitution	relating  to
fundamental  rights,  makes it unnecessary to  discuss	with
reference to the provisions of the statute that, even if the
question  were open, the Act does not stiffer from any	such
infirmity, as is attributed to it.In  view of the considerations set out above, we allow	this
appeal, set aside the judgment under appeal with costs	here
and   in   the	High  Court.   The   respondent's   petition
questioning the vires of the Act is dismissed.
Appeal allowed.____________________379