Take notes as you read a judgment using ourVirtual Legal Assistantand get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out ourPremium Memberservices --Free for one month.Supreme Court of IndiaThe Income-Tax Officer, Alwaye vs The Asok Textiles Ltd., Alwaye on 13 December, 1960Equivalent citations: 1961 AIR  699, 1961 SCR  (3) 236Author: K L.Bench: Kapur, J.L.PETITIONER:
THE INCOME-TAX OFFICER, ALWAYE

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
THE ASOK TEXTILES LTD., ALWAYE

DATE OF JUDGMENT:
13/12/1960

BENCH:
KAPUR, J.L.
BENCH:
KAPUR, J.L.
HIDAYATULLAH, M.
SHAH, J.C.

CITATION:
 1961 AIR  699		  1961 SCR  (3) 236
 CITATOR INFO :
 E&D	    1987 SC 575	 (5)


ACT:
Income-tax--Rectification, scope of--If can be equated	with
review under the Code--Advance Payment of tax-Penal interest
due to additional tax on rectification, if could be imposed-
Code  of  Civil Procedure (V of 1908), O.  47,	r.  1-Indian
Income-tax Act, 1922 (11 of 1922),ss. 18A(8), 35.



HEADNOTE:
After  the respondents net assessable income for  the  years
,952-53	  was  determined,  it	declared   dividends   which
attracted  provisions of theFinance Act, 1952,	 and  became
liable to the
237
payment of additional income-tax, which fact was  overlooked
by the Income-tax Officer, who, after giving notice unders.
35of the Income-tax Act, rectified the error and imposed an
additional  tax	 at the rate of one anna in the	 rupee.	  He
later  discovered that this was also erroneous and the	rate
should	have  been five anmas in a rupee and  rectified	 the
error;	by  the	 same order the	 omission  to  impose  penal
interest  unders. 18A(8)was rectified and  penal  interest
was  imposed.  The respondent's case before the	 High  Court
was  thats. 35.of the Act did not apply and  that  on	 the
merits	the additional tax could not be imposed.   The	High
Court held that the necessary foundation for the exercise of
the  powers underS. 35bad not been laid and therefore	 the
Income-tax  Officer had no jurisdiction to make	 the  order;
and also that the penal interest unders. 18A(8)of the	 Act
for  failure  to  make	advance	 deposit  was  also  without
jurisdiction.
Held,  that  the language and scope ofS. 35of	 the  Indian
Income-tax  Act, 1922, could not be equated with that of  O.
47,  r.	 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure.   The  Income-tax
Officer could underS. 35of the Act examine the record	 and
if he discovered that a mistake had been made, could rectify
the  error both of law and fact.  The restrictive  operation
of the powers of review under 0. 47, r. of the Code of Civil
Procedure  was	not applicable in the case ofs. 35of	 the
Income-tax Act.
Held,  further, that thes. 18A(8)was a mandatory  one	 and
the  Income-tax	 Officer  was  required	 to  calculate	 the
interest in the manner provided under the provisions of that
sub-section and had to add it to the assessment.
Maharana  Mills (P.)Ltd. v. Income-tax Officer,  [1959]  36
I.T.R. 350 andM. K. Venkatachalam v. Bombay Dyeing&  Manu-
facturing Co. Ltd., [1958] 34 I.T.R. 143, discussed.Commissioner of Income-tax v. Elphinstone Spinning & Weaving
Mills Co. Ltd. [1960] 40 I.T.R. 142,Commissioner of Income-
tax, Bombay City v. Jalgaon Electric Supply Co. Ltd., [1960]
40 I.T.R. 184 andCommissioner of Income-tax, Bombay City v.
Khatau Makanji Spng. & Weavg to.  Ltd., [1960] 40 I.T.R. 189
not applicable.



JUDGMENT:CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 311 of 1959.
Appeal	from the judgment and order dated October 31,  1955,
of the Travancore Cochin High Court, Ernakulam, in  Original
Petition No. 75 of 1955.A. N. Kripal and D. Gupta, for the appellant.
Sardar Bahadur, for the respondent.1960.  December 13.  The Judgment of the Court was delivered
by238KAPUR, J.-This is an appeal pursuant to a certificate of the
High Court of Kerala against the judgment and order of	that
court and the question for decision is the applicability  of
s.  35 of theIndian	Income-tax Act(hereinafter  termed
the 'Act').The facts which have given rise to the appeal are these: The
respondent is a limited company which owns a spinning  mills
at Alwaye.  It commenced business in January, 1951, and	 its
first  accounting year ended on December 31, 1951,  and	 the
relevant  assessment year is 1952-53.  It filed	 its  return
showing	 an income Rs. 3,21,284 without taking into  account
the  amount allowable unders. 15Cof the Act.	On  February
2,  1953,  the net assessable income of the  respondent	 was
determined  at	Rs. 1,47,083 after  deducting  Rs.  1,79,081
unders. 15C.  The respondent however declared a dividend of
Rs. 4,72,415 which attracted the application ofs. 2of	 the
Finance	 Act, 1952, read with Part B, proviso (ii) of  First
Schedule  and  thus  it	 became liable	to  the	 payment  of
additional  income tax and this fact was overlooked  by	 the
Income-tax Officer.  After giving notice unders. 35of	 the
Act,  the Income-tax Officer by an order dated	January	 25,
1954, rectified this error and imposed an additional tax  at
the rate of one anna in the rupee.  He later discovered that
this  was  also erroneous and the rate should  have  been  5
annas  in  a rupee.  By an order dated August 12,  1954,  he
rectified  the error.  Unders. 18A, advance income tax	 had
to be paid and the respondent company had deposited only Rs.
5,000 and therefore became liable to penal interest unders.
18A(8)of  the	 Act.  By the same order  this	omission  to
impose penal interest was' corrected and this error was thus
rectified.Against	 this order the respondent company went in  revision
unders. 33A(2)to the Commissioner of Income-tax  but	 the
revision  was dismissed.  Thereupon the	 respondent  company
filed a petition in the High Court of Kerala underArt.	 226of the Constitution on the ground thats. 35of the Act	 did
not apply and that on the merits additional tax could not be
imposed. The High Court by its judgment dated October 31,2391955 held that the orders made were without jurisdiction and
therefore  granted a writ of certiorari quashing the  orders
and the Income-tax Officer has brought this appeal  pursuant
to a certificate of that High Court.According  to  the  High  Court,s. 35of  the	 Act  was  a
provision  for	rectification of "mistakes apparent  on	 the
record"	 and  in  the opinion of the High  Court  it  was  a
mistake	 analogous  to	O. 47, r. 1 of	the  Code  of  Civil
Procedure  for grant of review on the ground of	 mistake  or
error apparent on the face of the record and it construed it
in the following words:-"i.e. an evident error which does not  require
	      any    extraneous	  matter   to	 show	 its
	      incorrectness.   The error may be one of	fact
	      but  is  not limited to matters  of  fact	 and
	      include also errors of law.  But the law	must
	      be  definite and capable of ascertainment.  An
	      erroneous view of law on a debatable point  or
	      a	 wrong	exposition  of the law	or  a  wrong
	      application  of the law or a failure to  apply
	      the  appropriate	law cannot be  considered  a
	      mistake  or error apparent on the face of	 the
	      record.	See Chitaley's C.P.C. Col.  III	 pp.
	      3549-50, 5th edition."On the ground that the applicability of proviso (ii) of Part
B  of  the First Schedule of the Finance Act was  a  complex
question which could not be said to be "apparent on the face
of  the	 record",  the High Court held	that  the  necessary
foundation  for the exercise of the powers unders.  35had
not  been laid and therefore the Income-tax Officer  had  no
jurisdiction to make the order that he did.  The High  Court
also held that the levy of penal interest unders. 18A(8)of
the Act for failure to make advance deposit unders.  18A(3)was also without jurisdiction.The  learned  Judges of the High Court seem to	have  fallen
into an error in equating the language and scope ofs. 35of
the Act with that of O. 47, r. 1, Civil Procedure Code.	 The
language of the two is different because according tos.  35of the Act which provides for rectification of mistakes	 the
power is given to the various income-tax authorities  within
four years from the date of any assessment passed by them to
rectify240any  mistake  "apparent from the record" and  in  the  Civil
Procedure Code the words are "an error apparent on the	face
of  the record" and the two provisions do not mean the	same
thing.	 This  court inMaharana  Mills	 (Private)  Ltd.  v.
Income-tax Officer, Porbandar(1) has laid down the scope of
s. 35 at p. 358 in the following words:-"The  power  undersection  35is  no  doubt
	      limited to rectification of mistakes which are
	      apparent	 from	the   record.	 A   mistake
	      contemplated by this section is not one  which
	      is to be discovered as a result of an argument
	      but  it is open to the Income-tax	 Officer  to
	      examine the record including the evidence	 and
	      if he discovers any mistake he is entitled  to
	      rectify the error provided that if the  result
	      is  enhancement of assessment or reducing	 the
	      refund  then notice has to be  given  to	the
	      assessee and he should be allowed a reasonable
	      opportunity of being heard."In  that case the error arose because of an initial  mistake
in determining the written down value which was subsequently
rectified.  In an earlier caseM. K. Venkatachalam v. Bombay
Dyeing & Manufacturing Co.  Ltd. (2) where as a	 consequence
of  a subsequent amendment of the law  having  retrospective
effect,	 the  Income-tax  Officer  reduced  the	 amount	  of
interest  unders.  18A(5)of the  Act  and  the  assessee
obtained  from the High Court a writ of prohibition  against
the  Income-tax	 Officer  on the  ground  that	the  mistake
contemplated had to be apparent on the face of the order and
not  a mistake resulting from an amendment of the  law	even
though it was retrospective in its effect, it was held	that
it   was  a  case  of  error  apparent	from   the   record.
Gajendragadkar, J. in his judgment said:-"At  the	time  when  the	 Income-tax  Officer
	      applied his mind to the question of rectifying
	      the  alleged  mistake, there can be  no  doubt
	      that  he	had  to read the  principal  Act  as
	      containing the inserted proviso as from  April
	      1, 1952."Thus this court has held that discovery of an error on
(1) [1959] 36 I.T.R. 350.(2) [1958] 34 I.T.R. 143.241the  basis  of	assessment  due to  an	initial	 mistake  in
determining  the  written down value is a mistake  from	 the
record and so is a misapplication of the law even though the
law  came  into operation retrospectively.   The  Income-tax
Officer, can, unders. 35of the Act, examine the record and
if  he discovers that he has made a mistake he	can  rectify
the  error  and the error which can be corrected may  be  an
error  of fact or of law.  The restrictive operation of	 the
power  of review under 0. 47 R. 1, Civil Procedure  Code  is
not  applicable in the case ofs. 35of the Act and  in	 our
opinion	 it cannot be said that the order of the  Income-tax
Officer	 in  regard  to assessment in  dispute	was  without
jurisdiction.In  regard  to	s.  18A (8) also  the  learned	Judges	have
misdirected  themselves because that section  is  mandatory.
It provides:-S.    18A(8)  "Where,  on making	the  regular
	      assessment, the Income-tax Officer finds	that
	      no payment of tax has been made in  accordance
	      with the foregoing provisions of this section,
	      interest calculated in the manner laid down in
	      sub-section  (6) shall be added to the tax  as
	      determined   on  the  basis  of  the   regular
	      assessment."Therefore  the Income-tax Officer was required to  calculate
the interest in the manner provided under the provisions  of
that sub-section and had to add it to the assessment.
Counsel	 for the respondent sought to raise the question  as
to  the	 applicability of proviso (ii) of Part	B  of  First
Schedule  of  the  Finance  Act 1952  and  relied  upon	 the
judgments  of  this Court inCommissioner of  Income-tax  v.
Elphinstone  Spinning  &  Weaving Mills Co.   Ltd.  (1)	 and
similar cases reported asCommissioner of Income-tax, Bombay
City   v.   Jalgaon  Electric  Supply	Co.    Ltd.(1)	 andCommissioner  of Income-tax, Bombay City v.  Khatau  Makanji
Spinning  and Weaving Co. Ltd. (3); but the facts  of  those
cases were different.  In the first case there was no  total
income and the
(1) [1960] 40 I.T.R. 142.      (2) [1960] 40 I.T.R. 184.
(3) [1960] 40 I.T.A. 189.31242Finance Actwas not applicable in that case.  In the  second
there was no profit in any preceding year and therefore	 the
fiction	 failed because it postulates that there  should  be
undistributed  profits	of  one or  more  years	 immediately
preceding  the	previous year.	In the third case  also	 theFinance Actwas inapplicable because the additional tax	 was
not  properly  laid  upon  the total  income  and  what	 was
actually  taxed was never a part of the total income of	 the
previous year.In  our opinion the order of the High Court  was  erroneous.
We  therefore allow this appeal and set aside  the  judgment
and order of the High Court with costs in this court and  in
the High Court.Appeal allowed.__________________