Take notes as you read a judgment using ourVirtual Legal Assistantand get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out ourPremium Memberservices --Free for one month.Supreme Court of IndiaThe Darcah Committee, Ajmer vs State Of Rajasthan on 24 April, 1961Equivalent citations: 1962 AIR  574, 1962 SCR  Supl. (2) 265Author: P GajendragadkarBench: Gajendragadkar, P.B.PETITIONER:
THE DARCAH COMMITTEE, AJMER

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF RAJASTHAN

DATE OF JUDGMENT:
24/04/1961

BENCH:
GAJENDRAGADKAR, P.B.
BENCH:
GAJENDRAGADKAR, P.B.
WANCHOO, K.N.
GUPTA, K.C. DAS
AIYYAR, T.L. VENKATARAMA

CITATION:
 1962 AIR  574		  1962 SCR  Supl. (2) 265
 CITATOR INFO :
 R	    1966 SC 108	 (3)


ACT:
Municipality--Costs  incurred  for  repairs  realisable	  by
Committee as tax--Magistrate entertaining application-If  an
inferior    criminal   court-Ajmer-Merwara    Municipalities
Regulation, 1925 (Regulation VI of 1925), ss. 222(4), 234.



HEADNOTE:
On the failure of the appellant to carry out the requisition
by  the	 Municipality  to execute  certain  repairs  to	 its
property the Municipality carried out the said repairs after
giving due notice, the cost of which became recoverable from
the  appellant as tax under S. 222(4) of the  Ajmer  Merwara
Municipalities	Regulation.  The Municipality applied  under
S.  234	 Of the Regulation to the Additional  Tehsildar	 and
Magistrate,  II Class, Ajmer for the recovery of the  amount
of cost incurred by them, and the magistrate passed an order
calling	 upon the appellant to pay the dues.   Against	this
order	the   appellant	 preferred   a	 criminal   revision
application  in	 the  court  of	 Sessions  judge  which	 was
rejected  as there was no ground to interfere  in  revision.
The  appellant then moved the High Court in  its  revisional
jurisdiction  wherein  the  respondents	 raised	 preliminary
objection  that the criminal revision application  filed  by
the  appellant	was  incompetent since	the  Magistrate	 who
entertained   respondent   No.	 2   Municipal	 Committee's
application under S. 234 was not an inferior criminal  court
underS. 439of the Criminal Procedure
266
Code,  the  said  objection  was  upheld  and  the  criminal
revision application dismissed on that ground.
The question was whether the Magistrate who entertained	 the
application  made before him by the Municipality  unders.
234of the Regulation was an inferior criminal court  under
S.  439Of the Codeof Criminal Procedure, and also  whether
an  application underS. 234could be made unless the  rules
were framed and the forms of the notice for making a  demand
underS.  222were prescribed.
Held,  that  the Proceedings initiated before  a  Magistrate
under S. 234 of the Ajmer Merwara Municipalities  Regulation
were  merely  in the nature of recovery proceedings  and  no
other  questions  could be raised in the  said	proceedings.
The  nature of the enquiry contemplated byS. 234was	very
limited;  it  prima  facie partook of  the  character  of  a
ministerial enquiry rather than judicial enquiry and at	 the
best could be treated as a proceeding of a civil nature	 but
not a criminal proceeding and the Magistrate who entertained
the application was not an inferior criminal court.
Whatever may be the character of the proceedings, whether it
was  purely ministerial or judicial or	quasi-judicial,	 the
Magistrate  who	 entertained the application  and  held	 the
enquiry did so because he was designated in that behalf	 and
so  he must be treated as a persona designate and not  as  a
Magistrate  functioning and exercising his  authority  underthe  Codeof Criminal Procedure.  He could not therefore  be
regarded as an inferior criminal court.
Held,  further,	 that if the rules were	 not  prescribed  as
required byS. 234of the Regulation then all that could  be
said  was  that there was no form prescribed for  issuing  a
demand	notice, that did not mean that the  statutory  power
conferred on the committee bys. 222(1)to make a demand was
unenforceable and an amount which was claimable by virtue of
S.  222(1) did not cease to be claimable just because  rules
had not been framed prescribing the form for making the said
demand.
Crown through Municipal Committee, Ajmer v. Amba Lal, Ajmer-
Merwara	 Law  journal,	Vol.   V,  92,	Re  Dinbai  Jijibhai
Khambatta,  (1919)  I.L.R.  43 Bom. 864,V.  B.	 D'Monte  v.
Bandra	Borough Municipality, I.L.R. 1950 Bom. 522,Emperor
v.  Devappa  Ramappa,  (1918) 43  Bom.	607,  Re  Dalsukhram
Hurgovandas,   (1907)  6  Cr.	L.  J.	425  and   Municipal
Committee,  Lashkay  v. Shahbuddin, A.I.R. 1952	 M.  B.	 48,
referred to.



JUDGMENT:CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 162  of
1959.Appeal	by special leave from the judgment and	order  dated
January	 13,  1959,  of the Rajasthan High Court  in  D.  B.
Criminal Revision No. 47 of 1957.267N.   C.	 Chatterjee,  J.  L. Datta and C. P.  Lal,  for	 the
appellant.Mukat  Behari  Lal Bhargava and Naunit Lal,  for  respondent
No.2.1961.  April 24.  The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
GAJENDRAGADKAR, J.-On June 13,1950, the Municipal Committee,
Ajmer, respondent 2, issued a notice against the  appellant,
the  Durgah  Committee, Ajmer, under s. 153  of	 the  Ajmer-
Merwara	  Municipalities  Regulation,  1925  (VI  of   1925)
(hereafter  called the Regulation) calling upon it to  carry
out  certain  repairs  in the Jhalra Wall  which  was  in  a
dilapidated  condition.	 The appellant did not	comply	with
the  said  requisition and so respondent  2  served  another
notice on the appellant unders. 220of the Regulation inti-
mating to it that the required repairs would be carried	 out
at the expense of respondent 2 and that the cost incurred by
it  would be recovered from the appellant.  This notice	 was
served on July 3, 1950.	 Even so the appellant took no steps
to make the repairs and so respondent 2 proceeded to get the
repair	work  done  at its expense  which  amounted  to	 Rs.
17,414.	  Unders. 222(4)of the Regulation this sum  became
recoverable from the appellant as a tax.  A notice of demand
in that behalf was issued on the appellant on April 1, 1952,
and in pursuance of the said notice respondent 2 applied  to
the Additional Tehsildar and Magistrate II Class, Ajmer, for
the  recovery  of  the	said amount  unders.	234of	 the
Regulation.In  the	 proceedings  before  the  learned  Magistrate	 the
appellant  raised certain pleas.  These pleas were  rejected
and  an order was passed calling upon the appellant  to	 pay
the dues in question by August 30, 1956.  Against this order
the  appellant preferred a criminal revision application  in
the  Court  of	the  Sessions  Judge,  Ajmer.	The  learned
Sessions  Judge	 considered the contentions  raised  by	 the
appellant  and	held that the view taken by  the  Magistrate
cannot be said to be incorrect and so there was no ground to
interfere  in revision.	 Feeling aggrieved by the  dismissal
of its268revision  application the appellant moved the High Court  of
Judicature  for	 Rajasthan in its  revisional  jurisdiction.
Before the High Court, on behalf of respondent 1, the  State
of  Rajasthan,	as  well  as  respondent  2,  a	 preliminary
objection was raised that the criminal revision	 application
filed by the appellant was incompetent since the  Magistrate
who entertained respondent 2's application made unders. 234",as not an inferior criminal court unders. 439of the Code
of  Criminal  Procedure.   This	 preliminary  objection	 was
upheld	 by  the  High	Court  and  the	 criminal   revision
application  dismissed on that ground.	It is  against	this
order  that the appellant has come to this Court by  special
leave;	and the short question which the appeal	 raises	 for
our  decision is whether the Magistrate who entertained	 the
application made before him by respondent 2 unders. 234was
an  inferior  criminal	court unders. 439of  the  Code  of
Criminal  Procedure.  Before dealing with this point  it  is
relevant  to refer to the scheme of the material  provisions
of  the	 Regulation.Section	153confers  power  on	 the
Municipality  to order removal or repair of buildings  which
may  be found in a dangerous state.  Under this section	 the
Committee  may by notice require the owner of the  building,
wall or structure to remove the same forthwith or cause such
repairs	 as  the Committee may consider	 necessary  for	 the
public safety.	This section also empowers the Committee  to
take  at the expense of the owner any steps which it  thinks
necessary  for the purpose of averting imminent danger.	  If
the  owner on whom a notice is served unders. 153complies
with  the  requisition	nothing	 more  need  be	 done.	 If,
however,  the  owner does not comply  with  the	 requisition
served	on  him	 the Committee is  empowered  to  cause	 the
repairs to be made after six hours notice to the owner under
s.  220.  This section provides that whenever the  terms  of
any  notice  issued  under this	 Regulation  have  not	been
complied  with the Committee may, after six  hours'  notice,
cause the act to be done by its officers.  As a corollary to
this  provision,  and  indeed as  its  consequence,s.	 222empowers the Committee to recover the cost of the work done269unders. 220.Section 222(1)authorises the  Committee  to
recover	 the  cost of the work from the person	in  default.
Sub-sections  (2)  and	(3) ofs. 222then  deal  with	 the
question as to which person should be held to be in default,
the  owner  or the occupier; with that question we  are	 not
concerned in the present appeal.  Sub-section (4) ofs.	 222provides  that where any money recoverable by the  Committee
under this section is payable by the owner of the  property,
it  shall be charged thereon and shall be recoverable as  if
it  were a tax levied by the Committee on the property.	  By
sub-section (5) it is provided that the contract between the
owner and the occupier is not affected by this section.	  It
is unders. 222(4)that a demand notice was served on  the
appellant  by  respondent 2. That takes us tos.  234which
provides for the machinery of recovery of municipal  claims.
This section provides, inter alia, that any tax claimable or
recoverable  by	 a Committee under  this  Regulation,  after
demand	has been made therefor in the manner  prescribed  by
rule,  be  recovered on application to a  Magistrate  having
jurisdiction within the limits of the Municipality or in any
other  place where the person by whom the amount is  payable
may  for the time being reside, by the distress and sale  of
any movable property within the limits of such	Magistrate's
jurisdiction belonging to such person.	The proviso to	this
section	 prescribes  that  nothing  in	this  section  shall
prevent	 the Committee at its discretion from suing for	 the
amount payable in any competent Civil Court.  It would	thus
be  seen  that the object of making an	application  to	 the
Magistrate is to obtain an order from the Magistrate direct-
ing  the  recovery of the tax claimable	 or  recoverable  by
distress  and sale of any movable property belonging to	 the
defaulter.   It is under this section that  tile  Magistrate
was  moved by respondent 2. That in brief is the  scheme  of
the material provisions of the Regulation.
The main argument which Mt-.  Chatterjee, for the appellant,
has  pressed before us is that in determining the nature  of
the  proceedings  unders. 234and  the  character  of	 the
Magistrate who entertains an application made under the said
section, it is important to35270bear in mind that a person in the position of the  appellant
has  no other opportunity to challenge the validity  of	 the
notice as well as the validity of the claim made against him
by the Committee.  The argument is that it would be open  to
the owner to contend that the notice issued unders. 153is
invalid	 or  frivolous.	  It would also be open	 to  him  to
contend	 that the amount sought to be recovered from him  is
excessive and that even if the repairs were carried out they
could  not  have cost as much, and since the scheme  of	 the
Regulation  shows  that it provides no	opportunity  to	 the
owner to raise those contentions except in proceedings under
s.  234 the nature of the proceedings and the  character  of
the  Magistrate	 who  entertains them  should  be  liberally
construed.  The proceedings should be deemed to be  judicial
proceedings  and  the  Magistrate should be held  to  be  an
inferior   criminal  court  when  he  entertains  the	said
proceedings.If  the assumption on which the argument proceeds  that	 the
Regulation  provides  no other opportunity to the  owner  to
challenge the notice or to question the amount claimed	from
him  were  sound  then	there would be	some  force  in	 the
contention  thats. 234should be  liberally  construed  in
favour of the appellant.  But is that assumption right?	 The
answer to this question would depend upon the examination of
three  relevant provisions of the Regulation; they  aress.
222(4),93and226.  We have already seen thats.  222(4)provides  that any money recoverable by the Committee  under
s.  222(1) shall be recovered as if it were a tax levied  by
the Committee on the property and shall be charged  thereon.Section	 93provides for appeals against taxation.Section
93(1)lays  down, inter alia, that an	appeal	against	 the
assessment  or levy of any tax under this  Regulation  shall
lie to the Deputy Commissioner or to such officer as may  be
empowered  by  the  State Government in	 this  behalf.	 The
remaining five subsections ofs. 93prescribe the manner  in
which  the appeal should be tried and disposed of.   If	 the
amount	recoverable  by respondent 2 from the  appellant  is
made recoverable as if it were271a tax levied by the Committee, then against the levy of such
a  tax	an appeal would be competent unders.	93(1).	 Mr.
Chatterjee  argues  thats. 93(1)provides  for  an  appeal
against	 the  levy  of a tax, and  he  draws  a	 distinction
between the amount made recoverable as if it were a tax	 and
the amount recoverable as a tax.  His contention is that the
amount	which is recoverable unders. 222(1)is no doubt  by
fiction	 deemed	 to  be a tax but  against  an	amount	thus
deem.s.	  93(1).  We are not impressed by this argument.  If
by   the  fiction  introduced  bys. 222(4)the  amount  in
question  is to be deemed as if it were a tax it is  obvious
that full effect must be given to this legal fiction; and in
consequence  just  as  a  result of  the  said	section	 the
recovery procedure prescribed bys. 234becomes available to
the  Committee	so  would  the right  of  making  an  appeal
prescribed  bys. 93(1)be available to the appellant.	 The
consequence of the fiction inevitably is that the amount  in
question  can  be  recovered  as a  tax	 and  the  right  to
challenge  the	levy of the tax accrues	 to  the  appellant.
This  position	is  made perfectly clear bys.	 226.	This
section provides, inter alia, that where any order of a kind
referred  to ins. 222is subject to appeal, and  an  appeal
has  been instituted against it, all proceedings to  enforce
such  order shall be suspended pending the decision  of	 the
appeal,	  and  if  such	 order	is  set	 aside	on   appeal,
disobedience  thereto shall not be deemed to be an  offence.
It  is	obvious that this section postulates that  an  order
passed unders. 222is appealable and it provides that if an
appeal	is  made against such an order	further	 proceedings
would be stayed.  It is common ground that there is no other
provision in the Regulation providing for an appeal  against
an order made unders. 222(1); and so inevitably we go	back
tos. 93which provides for an appeal against the levy of  a
tax.  It would be idle to contend that thoughs. 226assumes
that  an appeal lies against an order made unders.  222(1)the  Legislature  has  for. gotten to provide  for  such  an
appeal.	  Therefore, in our opinion, there can be  no  doubt
that reading272ss.  222, 93 and 226 together the conclusion is	 inescapable
that  an appeal lies unders. 93(1)against the demand	made
by  the	 Committee  on the owner of the	 property  unders.
222(1).	 If that be so, the main, if not the sole  argument,
urged in support of the liberal construction ofs. 234turns
out to be fallacious. ow, looking ats. 234it is clear that
the  proceedings initiated before a Magistrate are  no	more
than recovery proceedings.  All questions which may  legiti-
mately	be raised against the validity of the notice  served
unders. 153or against the validity of the claim  made  by
the Committee unders. 222can and ought to be raised in  an
appeal	unders. 93(1), and if no appeal is preferred or  an
appeal	is preferred and is dismissed then all those  points
are concluded and can no more be raised in proceedings under
s. 234.	 That is    why	  the	nature	 of   the    enquiry
contemplated bys.  234is very limited and it prima  facie
partakes  of the character 'of a ministerial enquiry  rather
than judicial enquiry.	In any event it is difficult to hold
that  the  Magistrate who entertains the application  is  an
inferior  criminal court.  The claim made before him is	 for
the  recovery of a tax and the order prayed for is  for	 the
recovery  of  the tax by distress and sale  of	the  movable
property of the defaulter.  If at all, this would at best be
a  proceeding of a civil nature and not criminal.   That  is
why,  we  think,  whatever  may	 be  the  character  of	 the
proceedings, whether it is purely ministerial or judicial or
quasi-judicial,	  the	Magistrate   who   entertains	 the
application  and  holds the enquiry does so  because  he  is
designated  in	that behalf and so he must be treated  as  a
persona	 designata and not as a Magistrate  functioning	 and
exercising  his authority underthe Codeof Criminal  Proce-
dure.	He  cannot  therefore be  regarded  as	an  inferior
criminal  court.  That is the view taken by the	 High  Court
and  we	 see no reason to differ from it.   In	the  present
appeal	it  is	unnecessary to consider what  would  be	 the
character of the proceedings before a competent Civil  Court
contemplated  by the proviso.  Prima facie such	 proceedings
can be no more than execution proceedings.273Mr. Chatterjee also attempted to argue that the	 proceedings
unders.  234taken against the appellant by  respondent  2
were  incompetent  because a demand, has not  been  made  by
respondent  2 on the appellant in the manner  prescribed  by
rule as required bys. 234.  It does appear that rules	have
not been framed under the Regulation and so no form has been
prescribed  for making a demand unders. 222(1).   Therefore
the  argument  is that unless the rules are framed  and	 the
form  of notice is prescribed for making a demand  unders.
222(1)no demand can be said to have been made in the manner
prescribed  by	rules and so an application cannot  be	made
unders.  234.	  There	 are two  obvious  answers  to	this
contention.   The  first answer is that	 if  the  revisional
application made by the appellant before the High Court	 was
incompetent  this question could not have been urged  before
the High Court because it was part of the merits of the case
and  so cannot be agitated before us either.  As soon as  it
is  held  that the Magistrate was not an  inferior  criminal
court  the  revisional application filed  by  the  appellant
before	the High Court must be deemed to be incompetent	 and
rejected on that preliminary ground alone.  Besides, on	 the
merits	we see no substance in the argument.  If  the  rules
are  not prescribed then all that can be said is that  there
is no  form prescribed for issuing a demand  notice;  that
does  not  mean. that the statutory power conferred  on	 the
Committee  bys. 222(1)to make a demand  is  unenforceable.
As a result of the notice served by respondent 2 against the
appellant  respondent 2 was entitled to make  the  necessary
repairs	 at its cost and make a demand for reimbursement  of
the  said  cost.  That is the plain effect of  the  relevant
provisions  of the Regulation; and so, an amount  which	 was
claimable  by  virtue  ofs. 222(1)does  not  cease  to  be
claimable   just   because  rules  have	 not   been   framed
prescribing  the  form for making the said demand.   In	 our
opinion, therefore, the contention that the application made
unders. 234was incompetent must be rejected.
It now remains to consider some decisions to which274our  attention	was  drawn.   In  Crown	 through   Municipal
Committee, Ajmer v. Amba Lal (1), the Judicial	Commissioner
Mr.   Norman   held  that  a  Magistrate   entertaining	  an
application  unders. 234of the Regulation is	an  inferior
criminal  court.  The only reason given in sup-port of	this
view  appears  to  be that the	Magistrate  before  whom  an
application  under  the said section is	 made  is  appointed
underthe  Codeof  Criminal Procedure, and  so  he  is  a
criminal court although he is not dealing with crime.	That
is  why	 it  was held that he  had  jurisdiction  to  decide
whether	 the  conditions under which  the  Municipality	 can
resort to the Magistrate are fulfilled.	 Having come to this
conclusion  the	 learned Judicial Commissioner held  that  a
revision  against the Magistrate's order was competent.	  In
our  opinion this decision does not correctly represent	 the
true  legal  position with regard to the  character  of	 the
proceedings  unders. 234and the status of  the  Magistrate
who entertains them.In  Re Dinbai Jijibhai Khambatta (2) the Bombay	 High  Court
held that the order made, by a Magistrate under s. 161(2) of
the Bombay District Municipalities Act, 1901 (Bombay III  of
1901)  can be revised by the High Court unders. 435of	 the
Code of Criminal Procedure.  This decision was based on	 the
ground	that the former part ofs. 161was  purely  judicial
and  it	 was held that the latter part of the  said  section
though	not clearly judicial should be deemed to partake  of
the  same character as the former part.	 Thus  the  decision
turned upon the nature of the provisions
contained ins. 161(2).In  V. B. D'Monte v. Bandra Borough Municipality(1)  a	Full
Bench  of  the	Bombay	High Court,  while  dealing  with  a
corresponding provision of the Bombay Municipal Boroughs Act
XVIII  of 1925, namely,s. 110, has held that in  exercising
its  revisional jurisdiction unders. 110the High Court  is
exercising  a special jurisdiction conferred upon it by	 the
said section and not the jurisdiction conferred unders. 435of the Code of Criminal Procedure.  According to this
(1)  Ajmer-Merwara Law journal, Vol.  V, P. 92.
(2) (1919) I.L.R. 43 Bom. 864.(3) I.L.R. 1950 Bom. 522.275decision  the  matter coming before the High Court  in	such
revision   is  of  civil  nature  and  so   the	  revisional
application  would lie to the High Court on its	 civil	side
and  not on its criminal side.	It is significant  that	 the
decision in the case ofEmperor v. Devappa Ramappa(1) which
took a contrary view was not followed.In  Re Dalsukhram Hurgovandas (2) the Bombay High Court	 had
occasion   to  consider	 the  nature  of   the	 proceedings
contemplated  by s. 86 of the Bombay District Municipal	 Act
III  of	 1901.	 Under	the said  section  a  Magistrate  is
empowered  to hear an appeal specified in the said  section;
and  it	 was  held  that in hearing  the  said	appeals	 the
Magistrate   is	  merely  an  appellate	  authority   having
jurisdiction to deal with questions of civil liability.	  He
is therefore not an inferior criminal court and as such	 his
orders are not subject to the revisional jurisdiction of the
High Court unders. 435of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
The  Madhya  Bharat High Court had occasion  to	 consider  a
similar	 question under s. 153 of the Gwalior Municipal	 Act
(1993  Smt.) in Municipal Committee, Lashkar v.	 Shahabuddin
(3).   Under the said section an application can be made  by
the  Municipality for recovering the cost of the  work	from
the person in default.	It was held that the order passed in
the  said  proceedings cannot be revised by the	 High  Court
unders. 435because the order is an  administrative  order
and  that there was no doubt that the Magistrate was not  an
inferior criminal court.In  Mithan Musammat v. The Municipal Board of Agra  &  Anr.,
(4)  the  Allahabad High Court has held	 that  a  Magistrate
passing	 an  order under s. 247(1) of the  United  Provinces
Municipalities	Act,  1926  does not do so  as	an  inferior
criminal  court within the meaning ofs. 435of the Code  of
Criminal  Procedure.  To the same effect is the decision  of
the Allahabad High Court inMadho Ram v. Rex(1).
We have referred to these decisions only to illustrate	that
in dealing with similar provisions under the
(1)  (1918) 43 Bom. 607.(3)  A.I.R. (39) 1952 M.B. 48.(2)  (1907) 6 Cr.  L.J. 425.(4)  I.L.R. (1956) 2 All. 60.(5) I.L.R. (1950) All. 392.276municipal  law different High Courts seem to have taken	 the
view  that  Magistrates	 entertaining  recovery	 proceedings
under the appropriate statutory provisions are not  inferior
criminal  courts  underthe Codeof	 Criminal Procedure.
Though	we have referred to these decisions we wish to	make
it clear that we  should not be taken to have expressed	 any
opinion	 about	the correctness or otherwise  of  the  views
taken  by  the	different  High	 Courts	 in  regard  to	 the
questions raised before them.The result is the appeal fails and is dismissed.Appeal dismissed.