Take notes as you read a judgment using ourVirtual Legal Assistantand get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out ourPremium Memberservices --Free for one month.Supreme Court of IndiaThe Central Talkies Ltd., Kanpur vs Dwarka Prasad on 16 January, 1961Equivalent citations: 1961 AIR  606, 1961 SCR  (3) 495Author: HidayatullahBench: Hidayatullah, M.PETITIONER:
THE CENTRAL TALKIES LTD., KANPUR

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
DWARKA PRASAD.

DATE OF JUDGMENT:
16/01/1961

BENCH:
HIDAYATULLAH, M.
BENCH:
HIDAYATULLAH, M.
KAPUR, J.L.
SHAH, J.C.

CITATION:
 1961 AIR  606		  1961 SCR  (3) 495
 CITATOR INFO :
 RF	    1966 SC1888	 (3)
 D	    1969 SC 483	 (12)
 R	    1978 SC   1	 (8)


ACT:
Rent  Control-Ejectment	 suit with  Permission	of  District
Magistrate-Additional  District	 Magistrate,  if  can  grant
permission Persona designata-U.	 P. (Temporary) Control	 of
Rent  andEviction Act, 1947 (U.  P. III of 1947)ss.	2(d)and3Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (V of 1898),S. 10.



HEADNOTE:
Section	 3  of	the U. P. (Temporary) Control  of  Rent	 andEviction  Act, 1947, enabled a landlord to file a  suit	 for
eviction  of the tenant with the permission of the  District
Magistrate.Section  2(d)of	 the  Act  defined  District
Magistrate as including an    officer	authorised  by	 the
District Magistrate to perform any of	his functions  under
the Act.  By a notification issued unders.  10(2)of	 the
Code  of Criminal Procedure the U. P.  Government  appointed
Mr. Seth to be an Additional District Magistrate " with	 all
the powers of a District Magistrate under the said Code	 and
under  any  other  law for the time  being  in	force."	 The
respondent applied to the District Magistrate for permission
to  file  a suit for ejectment against the  appellant.	 The
District Magistrate transferred the application to Mr.	Seth
the   Additional   District  Magistrate	 who   granted	 the
permission.   The appellants contended that  the  permission
granted was invalid as the District Magistrate mentioned  in
s.  3 of the Act was a persona designata and the  permission
could  have  been  granted  only by him	 or  by	 an  officer
authorised  by him to perform his functions and not  by	 the
Additional District Magistrate.
Held, that the permission granted by the Additional District
Magistrate  was	 valid.	  The  notification  issued  by	 the
Government  invested  Mr. Seth with all the  powers  of	 the
District  Magistrate  underthe Codeas well  as  under	 any
other law including theEviction Actand he was competent to
grant  the  permission unders. 3. The	District  Magistrate
mentioned  inS. 3was not a persona designata.	  A  Persona
designata  is  a  person selected as an	 individual  in	 his
private	 capacity,  and	 not in his capacity  as  filling  a
particular character or office,Kedar Nath v. Moot Chand, A.I.R. 1953 All, 62, disapproved.
Parthasaradhi Naidu v, Koteswara Rao, (1923) I.L.R. 47	Mad.
369 (F.B.), referred to.



JUDGMENT:CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal No. 374 of 1957.
Appeal from the judgment and decree dated September 21, 1955
of the Allahabad High Court in First Appeal No. 251 of	1954
&rising out of the judgment64496and  decree dated May 24, 1954, of the Civil Judge,  Kanpur,
in Suit No. 35 of 1949.A.   V.	 Viswanatha Sastri, G. S. Pathak and Naunit Lal	 for
the appellant.N.   C. Chatterjee, S. N. Andley, J. B. Dadachanji and P.   L.
Vohra, for the respondent.1961.  January 16.  The Judgment of the Court was  delivered
by
HIDAYATULLAH, J.-This is an appeal against the judgment	 and
decree	of  the High Court of Allahabad with  a	 certificate
granted	 by  the  High Court underArt.	 133(1)(b)of  the
Constitution.  The High Court, reversing the decision of the
trial Court, decreed the present suit for ejectment  against
the  appellants, and also awarded damages to the  plaintiff-
respondent at the rate of Rs. 593-12-0 per month.  The	suit
was  filed by the respondent,, Babu Dwarka  Prasad,  against
the  appellants, Central Talkies Ltd., Kanpur, and Lala	 Ram
Narain Garg, the Managing Director of the Company.
The facts, briefly stated, are as follows: Dwarka Prasad was
the  sole owner of a plot of land No.73/22 (old	 No.  73/28)
situated in Collector gunj, Kanpur.  In 1933 an agreement of
lease  was  executed  by  five persons	in  favour  of	Lala
Rameshwardas,	the  predecessor-in-title  of  Babu   Dwarka
Prasad, by which the five lessees took over on lease a	hall
and  other con structions, which the lessor agreed to  build
at a cost of Rs. 16,000/- within four months.  It was agreed
that,  if  the	lessor was required to spend  an  amount  in
excess of Rs. 16,000/-, he would be entitled to interest  at
the  rate  of 12 annas per cent. per month from	 the  second
party  till the end of tenancy.	 The tenancy was from  month
to month, and the period of the tenancy was fixed at 5 years
in   the  first	 instance.   This  tenancy  continued	with
variations in the amount of rent till the year 1946, and  on
January	 15,  1946,  Dwarka  Prasad sent  a  letter  to	 the
defendants  that  the  period  of lease	 was  to  expire  on
February 28, 1946, and that the Central Talkies Ltd.  should
vacate	the  premises by that date, The defendants  did	 not
vacate the497premises,  and	a suit for ejectment was filed	against	 the
Central	 Talkies Ltd.During the pendency of that  suit,	 the
United	Provinces (Temporary) Control of Rent  andEviction
Act, 1947 (referred to in the judgment as theEviction Act),
came into force.  Unders. 3of the Eviction Act, permission
of the District Magistrate was required to file in any Civil
Court a suit for the eviction of a tenant, except on grounds
which were enumerated in the section.  Admittedly, that suit
was  filed  on	a ground which was  not	 enumerated  in	 the
section, and Dwarka Prasad withdrew it.	 He then applied  to
the District Magistrate for permission to eject the  Central
Talkies Ltd., from the premises, and permission was  granted
by  the Additional District Magistrate (Rural Area) on	July
7, 1948.  It is not necessary to state the pleas which	were
taken by the defendants in the newly filed suit, because the
only   point  argued  before  us  was  that  the  suit	 was
incompetent,  because permission of the District  Magistrate
as required bys. 3had not been obtained.The  Divisional Bench of the High Court held that  the	suit
was competent.	The two learned Judges,who heard the appeal,
reached	 the same conclusion, though on	 slightly  different
grounds.   Raghubar  Dayal,  J.	 held  that  the  Additional
District  Magistrate, who granted permission, was  empowered
by  the Provincial Government unders. 10(2)of the Code  of
Criminal Procedure to exercise all the powers of a  District
Magistrate  underthe Codeand all the laws  for  the	time
being  in force, and the requirements ofs. 3were  complied
with.	Brij Mohan Lal, J. came to the conclusion  that	 the
District   Magistrate  by  transferring	 the  case  to	 the
Additional  District Magistrate (Rural Area) had  authorised
him  to perform his functions under the Act in	this  behalf
and  that  the Additional District  Magistrate,	 being	thus
included in the definition of "District Magistrate" unders.
2(d),  was competent to grant the  permission.	 Concurring,
therefore, that the suit was instituted with the  permission
of the District Magistrate as required by theEviction	Act,
the Divisional Bench held that the suit was competent.498It  may be pointed out that, at first, the  application	 for
permission was made over by the District Magis. trate to Mr.
Hadi Hasan, who was also an Additional District	 Magistrate;
but the latter sent the case back to the District Magistrate
asking	for  a transfer, because he had been  approached  on
behalf	 of   the  defendants.	 The   District	  Magistrate
thereafter  passed  an order on February 11,  1948,  to	 the
following effect:"  Transferred to Additional District Magistrate (R.A.)	 for
disposal.  "The  application  for  permission was  disposed	 of  by	 Mr.
Brijpal	 Singh Seth, Additional District  Magistrate  (Rural
Area), on July 7, 1948.	 This Officer, who was previously  a
City   Magistrate,  Kanpur,  was  appointed  an	  Additional
District Magistrate by Notification No. 3400/11-276-48 dated
May  22,  1948.	 The material portion of  this	Notification
read as follows:" With effect from the date on which he  takes
	      over  charge  Shri Brijpal  Singh	 Seth,	City
	      Magistrate,  Kanpur,  is appointed  vice	Shri
	      Sheo Ramdas Saksena-(a)   under  sub-section (2) ofsection 10of
	      the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act V of
	      1898), to be an Additional District Magistrate
	      of   Kanpur   District,	with	jurisdiction
	      extending over the whole of the said  district
	      and   with  all  the  powers  of	a   District
	      Magistrate  under the said Code and under	 any
	      other law for the time being in force..."The  appellants	 contended before us that both	the  reasons
given  by  the Divisional Bench of the High Court  were	 not
valid, and that the suit was not brought in accordance	with
theEviction Act.  At first, the appellants wished to  raise
a  question as to the invalidity of the notice;	 but  during
the  course  of	 the arguments, that  ground  was  expressly
abandoned.   The  case was thus argued only on	the  footing
that the permission given by Mr. Brijpal Singh Seth did	 not
comply withs. 3of the Eviction Act.The  material portion ofs. 3, as it stood on  the  relevant
date, read as follows:"No suit shall, without the permission of	 the
	      District	Magistrate,  be filed in  any  civil
	      court499against  a  tenant for his eviction  from	 any
	      accommodation,  except on one or more  of	 the
	      following grounds...""District Magistrate" is defined bys. 2(d)of
	      the Act, which reads:District	 Magistrate'  includes	an   officer
	      author  rized  by the District  Magistrate  to
	      perform any of his functions under this Act."The  argument  of  the	appellants  was	 that  the  District
Magistrate  mentioned ins. 3was a persona  designata,	 and
that  either he or an officer authorised by him, to  perform
his	functions     could	grant	  permission.Accord-
ring to them, in view of the provisions quoted above and  in
view  also  of the provisions ofs. 1(2)of  the  Code'	 'of
Criminal  Procedure, no Additional District  Magistrate	 was
competent  to grant the permission, unless authorised to  do
so  by the District Magistrate.	 The order of  the  District
Magisistrate  by  which	 the  case  was	 made  over  to	 the
Additional    District	 Magistrate   (Rural	Area)	 was
characterised  as a mere transfer and not an  authorisation.
It was contended that a transfer could only take place to  a
person possessing jurisdiction, and that jurisdiction  under
the present Act was confined only to the District Magistrate
or an officer authorised by him.The transfer of the case, it
was  contended,	 did  not  constitute  such   authorisation.
Reliance  was  placed on the decision of  a  learned  single
Judge  of  the Allahabad High Court reported in	 Kedar	Nath
'V.' Mool Chand (1) and on the decision of the Nagpur  High.
Court referred to therein, P. K. Tare v. Emperor (2).Section	 10of	 the  Code of  Criminal	 Procedure,  at	 the
relevant time, provided as follows:"10(1),	In   every  district   outside	 the
	      presidency,  towns the  Provincial  Government
	      shall  appoint  a:  Magistrate  of  the  first
	      class,  who  shall  be  called  the   District
	      Magistrate.(2) The Provincial Government may appoint any
	      Magistrate  of  the  first  class	 to  be	  an
	      Additional   District  Magistrate	  and	such
	      Additional District, Magistrate shall have all
	      or any of the powers of a District  Magistrate
	      under this Code or under any
	      (1) A.I.R. 1953 All. 62.(2) A.I.R. 1943 Nag. 26.500other law for the time being in force, as	 the
	      Provincial Government may direct."The  Notification, which was issued about Mr. Brijpal  Singh
Seth  and which has been quoted already, invested  him	with
all the powers of the District Magistrate underthe Codeof
Criminal  Procedure as well as under any other law  for	 the
time being in force.  He was thus competent to deal with  an
applica.  tion under the Act for permission to file a  civil
suit without special authorisation from the District  Magis-
trate.	 Learned counsel for the appellants  contended	that
the  definition	 of " District Magistrate "  clearly  showed
that in addition to the District Magistrate, only an officer
specially  authorised  by him could act under  theEviction
Act,  and he referred to sub-s. (2) ofs. 1of the  Code  of
Criminal Procedure, which provided:"It  extends  to the whole of  British  India;
	      but, in the absence of any specific  provision
	      to  the  contrary,  nothing  herein  contained
	      shall  affect any special or local law now  in
	      force,  or any special jurisdiction  or  power
	      conferred,  or any special form  of  procedure
	      prescribed,  by  any other law  for  the	time
	      being in force..."The  argument was that the special jurisdiction	 created  by
theEviction Actwas not affected bys. 10(2)of the  Code,
in view of the provisions of this sub-section.	The argument
overlooks  the	words  "  in the  absence  of  any  specific
provision  to  the contrary ", and because there is  inthe
Codeof Criminal Procedure such a pro. vision ins.  10(2),
sub-s.	(2) ofs. 1is excluded, and an Additional  District
Magistrate  must be regarded as possessing the powers  under
any other law including theEviction Act.The  argument  that the District Magistrate  was  a  persona
designata  cannot  be accepted.	 Under the definition  of  "
District  Magistrate  ", the special  authorisation  by	 the
District  Magistrate  had the effect  of  creating  officers
exercising  the	 powers of a District Magistrate  under	 theEviction  Act.	 To that extent, those	officers  would,  on
authorisation,	be  equated to the District  Magistrate.   A
persona designata is " a501person who is pointed out or described as an individual,  as
opposed	 to a person ascertained as a member of a class,  or
as  filling a particular character." (See  Osborn's  Concise
Law Dictionary, 4th Edn., p. 253).  In the words of Schwabe,
C.J., inParthasaradhi Naidu v. Koteswara Rao(1),  personae
designatae  are " persons selected to act in  their  private
capacity  and  not in their capacity as	 Judges."  The	same
consideration applies also to a well-known officer like	 the
District Magistrate named by virtue of his office, and whose
powers the Additional District Magistrate can also  exercise
and  who can create other officers equal to himself for	 the
purposes of theEviction Act.  The decision of Sapru, J., in
the Allahabad case, with respect, was erroneous.
Reference   was	 made  to  the	definition  of	"   District
Magistrate   "	 in   the   United   Provinces	 (Temporary)
Accommodation  Requisition  Act, 1947, which includes  an  "
Additional  District Magistrate ". This definition has	been
made wide for obvious reasons, because unders. 10(2)of the
Code   of  Criminal  Procedure,	 the   Additional   District
Magistrate has to be specially empowered.  By including	 the
Additional  District  Magistrate  in  the  definition  of  "
District Magistrate ", power is conferred by the Requisition
Act   itself  whether  or  not	the  Provincial	  Government
specially   empowers  any  particular  Additional   District
Magistrate  in that behalf.The Eviction Act, on the  other
hand,,	gave power to the District Magistrate  to  authorise
officers  other	 than the  Additional  District	 Magistrates
empowered  by the Provincial Government, by defin.  ing	 the
term  "	 District Magistrate " differently.In  view  of	 the
above,	it is hardly necessary to into the reasons given  by
Brij Mohan Lal, J.; but even those reasons are, with all due
respect, equally valid.	 By the act of transferring the case
to   the  Additional  District	Magistrate,   the   District
Magistrate must be deemed to have authorised him to exercise
his  powers unders. 3of the Eviction Act.  However, it  is
not necessary to rely upon this aspect of the case  because,
in our opinion,s. 10(2)of the Code of
(1)  (1923) I.L.R. 47 Mad. 369, 373 (F.B.).502Criminal  Procedure gave ample powers to Mr.  Brijpal  Singh
Seth  to  accord permission for bringing the suit,  and	 the
order  of  the	District Magistrate, even if  treated  as  a
transfer, was valid.In  the	 result,  the appeal fails, and	 is  dismissed	with
costs.Appeal dismissed.